Syllabus of Courses
The Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda
Faculty o Science Academic Year 2021-22
Department of Computer Applications
BCA: Regular Program
Year III Theory of Computation Credits / Hours per week 04/60
Year of Introduction: 2019
Semester V Maximum Marks / Grade 100
Year of Syllabus Revision:
Mode of Transaction Lectures and Tutorials
Course Outcome (CO) BCA 1304
CO1 understand Finite autometa
CO2 Types of languages and their grammer
CO3 NP hard and NP complete
CO4 Understand Turing machine
Unit Topic/Unit Contact Weightage BT CO PSO Element Relevan Relation
No. Hours (%) Level s of ce to to
Employa Local Gender
bility (L)/ (G),
(Emp)/ National Environ
Entrepre (N)/ ment and
neurship Regional Sustaina
(Ent)/ (R)/Glob bility
Skill al (G) (ES),
Develop develop Human
ment mental Values
(SD) needs (HV)and
Professio
nal
Ethics
(PE)
1
1. Motivation – Computability, Formulation of computational
problems as membership in a suitable language, Introduction of
Turing machines.
PSO1,
Deterministic Finite Automata, Non-deterministic Finite
CO1, PSO2,
Automata, Languages defined by DFA and NFA, Advantages of 20 30 2,3,4
CO2 PSO3
using NFA,
Regular Expression – syntax and semantics, Regular Languages
– representation of regular languages, Properties of Regular
Languages.
2
Context Free Languages - Context Free Grammar, Pushdown
Automata, Grammars And Equivalences, Properties of Context
Free Languages, Deterministic Parsing.
PSO1,
CO1,
10 20 2,3,4,5,6 PSO2,
CO2
Turing Machines- definition, example, acceptance by final state, PSO3
instantaneous descriptions (ID), converting a DFA into an
equivalent TM.
Deterministic and Non-deterministic TMs and their
3 CO1,
equivalence, Equivalence of a Random Acces Memory machine PSO1,
CO2,
20 30 2,3,4,5,6 PSO2,
and von Neumann computer and basic TM model; Decidable CO3,
PSO3
Problems and Recursive Languages. CO4
4 Undecidability - Diagonalization And Halting Problem, More
Undecidable Problems
CO1,
Recursive Functions.
CO2,
10 20 2,3,4,5,6 PSO3
CO3,
Complexity Theory- Time Complexity, Space Complexity, NP
CO4
completeness.
Reference Books
1. Patterson D. W. (1990) Introduction to Artificial Intelligence and Expert systems, Prentice Hall of India, New Delhi.
2. Bratko, Ivan (1986): PROLOG: Programming for Artificial Intelligence, Addison-Wesley.
3. Winston, P. T. (1977): Artificial Intelligence, Addison Wesley.
Bloom’s Taxonomy Levels: 1. Remember 2. Understand 3. Application 4. Analysis 5. Evaluation 6. Creation
Programme Name: B.C.A: Regular Programme
Programme Specific Outcome(PSO)
PSO 1 . To train students in focused emerging areas and result in development of skills as per the demands of career opportunities in the IT sector.
PSO 2. To develop basic and advanced skills in programming of different languages and increasing their level of expertise through the specialization approach.
PSO 3 Formulate, review and analyze complex technical problems reaching conclusions using principles of mathematics , statistics, management and allied areas.
PSO 4 Learn web and mobile application development skills.
PSO 5 Learn Computer hardware with microprocessor architecture .
PSO 6 Learning Database management system along with designing ,query processing and managing databases using application programs.
PSO 6 Develop software solutions to address problems across broad range of application domains through software engineering principles.
PSO 7 Generating solutions in societal and environmental contexts.
PSO 8 Communicate effectively on topics for being able to comprehend and write effective reports and design documentation, make effective presentations, and give and
receive clear instructions.
PSO 9 Understand basic principles of data communication and networking with allied areas like intranet, internet and all communication resources with focus on
programming ,designing, analysing network applications.
PSO10 Understand basic principles of data communication and networking with allied areas like intranet, internet and all communication resources with focus on
programming, designing, analysing network applications.