Syllabus of Courses
The Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda
Faculty o Science Academic Year 2021-22
Department of Computer Applications
BCA: Regular Program
Core Elective
Year III Credits / Hours per week 04/60
BCA 1521: Artificial Intelligence
Year of Introduction: 2010
Semester V Maximum Marks / Grade 100
Year of Syllabus Revision:
Mode of Transaction Lectures and Tutorials
Course Outcome (CO)
CO1 Basics of artificial intelligence and logical reasoning
CO2 Applications of artificial intelligence
CO3 Understanding fuzzy logic
CO4 Understanding machine learning
Unit Topic/Unit Contact Weightage BT CO PSO Element Relevan Relation
No. Hours (%) Level s of ce to to
Employa Local Gender
bility (L)/ (G),
(Emp)/ National Environ
Entrepre (N)/ ment and
neurship Regional Sustaina
(Ent)/ (R)/Glob bility
Skill al (G) (ES),
Develop develop Human
ment mental Values
(SD) needs (HV)and
Professio
nal
Ethics
(PE)
T1h e Introduction:
The The meaning of Artificial Intelligence (AI) and its
importance.Relation between Artificial Intelligence,
Machine Learning, Deep Learning and other Related PSO1,
CO1, PSO2,
Fields. 20 30 2,3,4
CO2 PSO3
AI: LISP – brief introduction, Other languages –
PROLOG, Small Talk etc
Python for AI : Python Basics, Jupyter notebook –
installation and function, Python functions, packages and
routines, Pandas, NumPy, Matplotlib, Seaborn, working
with data structures , arrays, vectors and data frames.
2 Symbolic logic – Propositional logic: syntax and
semantics, First Order Predicate Logic (FOPL): syntax and
semantics, well formed formulas and their properties,
Clausal form, Inference rules, the resolution principle,
non-deductive inference methods; representations using
rules.
Search and control strategies: Graph and Tree
PSO1,
representations of a search space, uninformed search, CO1,
10 20 2,3,4,5,6 PSO2,
informed search – Hill climbing methods, best–first CO2
PSO3
search, branch and bound search, Searching AND-OR
graphs. Algorithms A A* AO*.
Matching techniques: Structures used in matching,
measures for matching – distance matrices, probabilistic
measures, qualitative measures, similarity measures.
Probabilistic reasoning – Bayesian inference, Possible
world representations, Heuristic reasoning methods.
Blocks world Problem
Game Playing and its Techniques
Introduction to Machine Learning: Basic Concepts of
3 Machine Learning, Types of Learning: Supervised,
Unsupervised and Reinforcement Learning, Categorical
and Continuous Data, Skewness and Correlation,
Regression Analysis Vs Classification
Neural Networks – Gradient Descent, Introduction to
perceptron and Neural Networks, Batch Normalization,
Activation and loss function, tensorflow and keras for Neural
CO1,
PSO1,
Networks. CO2,
20 30 2,3,4,5,6 PSO2,
CO3,
Genetic Algorithms: A simple genetic algorithm, computer PSO3
CO4
implementation of genetic algorithm, data structures,
reproduction, cross over and mutation. Time to reproduce
and time to cross mapping objective function to fitness
form, fitness scaling, application of genetic based machine
learning.
4 AI in Real World: Natural Language Processing (NLP) –
Introduction to NLP, accessing text and lexical resources,
CO1,
processing raw text, categorizing and tagging words, CO2,
10 20 2,3,4,5,6 PSO3
CO3,
analyze sentence structure, interactive chat-bot. CO4
Fuzzy Systems - Fuzzy Logic, classical set theory,
membership function, inference system, quantification
Image Processing – Visualization, Image sharpening and
restoration, Image enhancement, morphological
processing and image recognition.
Case study – Credit card fraud analysis, customer
segmentation and value
AI in Healthcare, Defense and Agriculture, Cyber
Security, Agriculture, E-Commerce, Gaming, Finance,
Smart Devices.
Reference Books
1. Patterson D. W. (1990) Introduction to Artificial Intelligence and Expert systems, Prentice Hall of India, New Delhi.
2. Bratko, Ivan (1986): PROLOG: Programming for Artificial Intelligence, Addison-Wesley.
3. Winston, P. T. (1977): Artificial Intelligence, Addison Wesley.
Bloom’s Taxonomy Levels: 1. Remember 2. Understand 3. Application 4. Analysis 5. Evaluation 6. Creation
Programme Name: BCA
Programme Specific Outcome(PSO)
PSO 1 . To train students in focused emerging areas and result in development of skills as per the demands of career opportunities in the IT sector.
PSO 2. To develop basic and advanced skills in programming of different languages and increasing their level of expertise through the specialization approach.
PSO 3 Formulate, review and analyze complex technical problems reaching conclusions using principles of mathematics , statistics, management and allied areas.
PSO 4 Learn web and mobile application development skills.
PSO 5 Learn Computer hardware with microprocessor architecture .
PSO 6 Learning Database management system along with designing ,query processing and managing databases using application programs.
PSO 7 Develop software solutions to address problems across broad range of application domains through software engineering principles.
PSO 8 Generating solutions in societal and environmental contexts.
PSO 9 Communicate effectively on topics for being able to comprehend and write effective reports and design documentation, make effective presentations, and give and
receive clear instructions.
PSO 10 Understand basic principles of data communication and networking with allied areas like intranet, internet and all communication resources with focus on
programming ,designing, analysing network applications.
Syllabus of Courses
The Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda
Faculty Of Science Academic Year 2021-22
Department of Computer Application
BCA: Regular Programme
Core / Elective / Foundation
Year III Credits / Hours per week 04Cr
CA527 Computer Graphics
Year of Introduction: 2007
Semester V Maximum Marks / Grade 100
Year of Syllabus Revision: 2021
Mode of Transaction Lectures and Tutorials
Course Outcome (CO) BCA527
CO1 Understand the basics of computer graphics, different graphics systems and applications of computer graphics.
CO2 Discuss various algorithms for scan conversion and filling of basic objects and their comparative analysis.
CO3 Use of geometric transformations on graphics objects and their application in composite form.
CO4 Extract scene with different clipping methods and its transformation to graphics display device.
CO5 Explore projections and visible surface detection techniques for display of 3D scene on 2D screen.
CO6 Render projected objects to naturalize the scene in 2D view and use of illumination models for this.
Unit Topic/Unit Contact Weightage BT CO PSO Element Relevan Relation
No. Hours (%) Level s of ce to to
Employa Local Gender
bility (L)/ (G),
(Emp)/ National Environ
Entrepre (N)/ ment and
neurship Regional Sustaina
(Ent)/ (R)/Glob bility
Skill al (G) (ES),
Develop develop Human
ment mental Values
(SD) needs (HV)and
Professio
nal
Ethics
(PE)
1
Introduction: Application of Computer Graphics,
interactive input/output devices, display, colour display
techniques, LCD & LED display, Raster Scanning, Raster
Refresh
Drawing geometry:
DDA algorithm, Bresenham’s line drawing algorithm,
translation, rotation, scaling, mirror reflection; Zooming and PSO1,P
CO1,
panning; Rubber band methods, dragging. 15 25% 1,2 SO2,PS
CO2
O3
Bresenham’s circle drawing algorithm, generation of ellipse,
parametric representation of curves, drawing the Bezier and B-
Spline curves, smoothly joining curve segments; Character
generation.
.
2 Graphic Operations: Clipping – Window port and view port,
Sutherland-Cohen line clipping algorithm, Midpoint subdivision
algorithm; Filling – Stack based fill algorithm, scan line seed
PSO2,P
15 25% 2,3 CO3 SO3,PS
fill algorithm.
O8
3D Graphics: Transformations – transformation matrices,
scaling and rotation, parallel projection, perspective projection,
Hidden surface elimination algorithms.
3 Illumination and Shading - Modeling a shiny surface, Goraud
Shading (linear intensity interpolation), Phong Shading (Normal
CO4
vector Interpolation); Tweening – the interpolation; Morphing – 15 PSO1,P
25% 3,4,
Warping, colour dissolve. SO3
Graphic Standards: GKS standards – brief discussion
4
Introduction to OpenGL, Functions, pipeline, sample programs
for drawing 2D, 3D objects, handling and view manipulation.
Drawing geometric objects – points, lines, and polygons; State
PSO1,P
management. CO5,
15 25% 5,6 SO3,PS
CO6
O8
Viewing: camera analogy, viewing and modeling
transformations, projection transformations, viewport
transformation; Using display lists – creating and executing a
display list, executing multiple display lists.
Reference Books
1. Mukherjee D. P. (1999): Fundamentals of Computer Graphics and Multimedia, PHI.
2. Stevens R. T. (1994): Object Oriented graphics programming in C++, A.P Professional.
3. Plastock R. A. and Kalley: Computer Graphics, Schaum’s Outline Series.
4. Woo, Mason et al. (2000): OpenGL Programming guide, 3e, Addison Wesley.
Bloom’s Taxonomy Levels: 1. Remember 2. Understand 3. Application 4.Analysis 5.Evaluation 6. Creation
Programme Name: B.C.A
Programme Specific Outcome (PSO)
PSO1 To train students in focused emerging areas and result in development of skills as per the demands of career opportunities in the IT sector.
PSO2 To develop basic and advanced skills in programming of different languages and increasing their level of expertise through the specialization approach.
PSO3 Formulate, review and analyze complex technical problems reaching conclusions using principles of mathematics, statistics, management and allied areas.
PSO4 Learn web and mobile application development skills.
PSO5 Learn Computer hardware with microprocessor architecture.
PSO6 Learning Database management system along with designing, query processing and managing databases using application programs.
PSO7 Develop software solutions to address problems across broad range of application domains through software engineering principles.
PSO8 Generating solutions in societal and environmental contexts.
PSO9 Communicate effectively on topics for being able to comprehend and write effective reports and design documentation, make effective presentations, and give and
receive clear instructions.
PSO10 Understand basic principles of data communication and networking with allied areas like intranet, internet and all communication resources with focus on
programming, designing, analyzing network applications.
Syllabus of Courses
The Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda
Faculty of Science Academic Year 2021-22
Department of Computer Application
BCA: Regular Programme
Core / Elective / Foundation
Year III Credits / Hours per week 04
BCAXXXX: Data Warehousing and Mining
Year of Introduction: 2010
Semester V Maximum Marks / Grade 100
Year of Syllabus Revision:
Mode of Transaction Lectures and Tutorials
Course Outcome (CO) BCAXXXX
CO1. Be familiar with mathematical foundations of data mining tools..
CO2. Understand and implement classical models and algorithms in data warehouses and data mining
CO3. Characterize the kinds of patterns that can be discovered by association rule mining, classification and clustering.
CO4. Master data mining techniques in various applications like social, scientific and environmental context.
CO5. Develop skill in selecting the appropriate data mining algorithm for solving practical problems.
Unit Topic/Unit Conta Weightage BT CO PSO Element Relevan Relation
No. ct (%) Level s of ce to to
Hour Employa Local Gender
s bility (L)/ (G),
(Emp)/ National Environ
Entrepre (N)/ ment and
neurship Regional Sustaina
(Ent)/ (R)/Glob bility
Skill al (G) (ES),
Develop develop Human
ment mental Values
(SD) needs (HV)and
Professio
nal
Ethics
(PE)
1 Decision support systems, the evolution.
Data warehouse environment – the structure of data ware
house, subject orientation, granularity, partitioning of data,
structuring data, data homogeneity and heterogeneity.
CO1, PS02,P
Data warehousing architectures – single layer and multilayer
15 25% 1,2, 3, 6 CO2, S03,PS
architectures.
CO3 04
Data warehouse
Data warehouse data model, the mid level data model, the
physical data model, mata data, profile records, managing
volume, Granularity in the data warehouse
Accessing warehouse data – Reports, OLAP, dashboards.
2 Data warehouse technologies
Managing large amounts of data, managing multiple media,
indexing and monitoring data, language interface, loading of
PS02,P
data, compactation of data, multidimensional DBMS
15 25% 1,2,4,5,6 CO4, S03,PS
The distributed data warehouse – the local and global data
04
warehouse, developing for distributed data warehouse,
building the ware house on multiple levels
3 Data Mining – Introduction
Introduction to Data Mining Systems – Knowledge
Discovery Process – Data Mining Techniques – Issues –
PS02,P
applications- Data Objects and attribute types, Statistical 15 25% 1,2,3,6 CO5 S03,PS
description of data, Data Preprocessing – Cleaning, 04
Integration, Reduction, Transformation and discretization,
Data Visualization, Data similarity and
dissimilaritymeasures.
4 Data Mining – Frequent Pattern Analysis
Mining Frequent Patterns, Associations and Correlations –
Mining Methods- Pattern Evaluation Method – Pattern
Mining in Multilevel, Multi Dimensional Space – Constraint
Based Frequent Pattern Mining, Classification using
Frequent Patterns
Classification And Clustering
PS01,P
CO6, S02,PS
15 25% 1,4,5,6
Decision Tree Induction – Bayesian Classification – Rule CO7 03,PS0
Based Classification – Classification by Back Propagation – 4,PS05
Support Vector Machines –– Lazy Learners – Model
Evaluation and Selection-Techniques to improve
Classification Accuracy. Clustering Techniques – Cluster
analysis-Partitioning Methods – Hierarchical Methods –
Density Based Methods – Grid Based Methods – Evaluation
of clustering – Clustering high dimensional data- Clustering
with constraints, Outlier analysis-outlier detection methods.
Reference Books
1. Matteo Golfarelli and Stefano Rizzi (2009):Data Warehouse Design: Modern Principles and Methodologies, McGraw-Hill Osborne Media
2. W. H. Inmon (2005): Building the Data Warehouse, 4e, Wiley
3.
Jiawei Han and Micheline Kamber, Data Mining Concepts and Techniques, Third Edition, Elsevier, 2012.
4.
Ian H.Witten and Eibe Frank, Data Mining: Practical Machine Learning Tools and Techniques, Elsevier, Second Edition.
5. K.P. Soman, Shyam Diwakar and V. Ajay, ―Insight into Data Mining Theory and Practice, Eastern Economy Edition, Prentice Hall of India, 2006.
Bloom’s Taxonomy Levels: 1. Remember 2. Understand 3. Application 4. Analysis 5. Evaluation 6. Creation
Programme Name
Programme Specific Outcome(PSO)
PSO1 To train students in focused emerging areas and result in development of skills as per the demands of career opportunities in the IT sector
PSO2 To develop basic and advanced skills in programming of different languages and increasing their level of expertise through the specialization approach.
PSO3 Formulate, review and analyze complex technical problems reaching conclusions using principles of mathematics , statistics, management and allied areas.
PSO4 Learn web and mobile application development skills.
PSO5 Learn Computer hardware with microprocessor architecture .
PSO6 Develop software solutions to address problems across broad range of application domains through software engineering principles.
PSO7 Generating solutions in societal and environmental contexts.
PSO8 Communicate effectively on topics for being able to comprehend and write effective reports and design documentation, make effective presentations, and give and
receive clear instructions.
PSO9 Understand basic principles of data communication and networking with allied areas like intranet, internet and all communication resources with focus on
programming ,designing, analysing network applications.