Syllabus of Courses
The Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda
Faculty of Science
Academic Year 2021-22
Department of Computer Applications
B.C.A: Regular Programme
Core / Elective / Foundation
Year III Credits / Hours per week 04
BCA 1520: Unix Systems Programming
Year of Introduction: 2010
Semester V Maximum Marks / Grade 100
Year of Syllabus Revision:
Mode of Transaction Lectures and Tutorials
Course Outcome (CO) BCA 1520
CO1 Effectively use the UNIX/Linux system to develop system programs using c or any other related language to perform tasks of file handling, process
management , inter-process communication and network programming.
Unit Topic/Unit Contact Weightage BT CO PSO Element Relevan Relation
No. Hours (%) Level s of ce to to
Employa Local Gender
bility (L)/ (G),
(Emp)/ National Environ
Entrepre (N)/ ment and
neurship Regional Sustaina
(Ent)/ (R)/Glob bility
Skill al (G) (ES),
Develop develop Human
ment mental Values
(SD) needs (HV)and
Professio
nal
Ethics
(PE)
1
Limitations of shell programming, Unix and C programming
15 25 1,2,3 CO1 1,2,3
language, Programming with standard I/O, program arguments
using function main, file I/O operations, writing small utility
programs; Debugging tools – adb, lint.
Accessing the environment from within a C program
Unix system calls
Low level I/O: File descriptors, File I/O – read and write, file
creation – open, create, close, unlink; error processing –
errorno, random access – lseek
2
Working with file system – directories, inodes.
Files, System Files, File Formats, Buffered I/O
15 25 1,2,3 CO1 1,2,3
File Systems
Files, Devices, Drivers
3
Signals and interrupts: the system call signal, Alarms – the
system call alarm.
The UNIX Kernel Support for Signals, signal, Signal Mask,
sigaction, The SIGCHLD Signal and the waitpid Function, The 15 25 1,2,3 CO1 1,2,3
sigsetjmp and siglongjmp Functions, Kill, Alarm, Interval Timers,
POSIX.lb Timers. Daemon Processes: Introduction, Daemon
Characteristics, Coding Rules, Error Logging, Client-Server
Model.
4
Processes in Unix: Low level process creation – execlp and
execvp; control of processes – fork and wait.
15 25 1,2,3 CO1 1,2,3
Inter-Process Communication, I/O Redirection and Pipes
make: a program for specifying and controlling the process by
which a complex program is compiled.
Network Programming: Sockets, Servers, Clients
Network Programming: A Web Server, :
Concurrent Programming
Reference Books
1.
Kay A. Robbins, Steven Robbins (2003): UNIX systems programming: communication, concurrency, and thread, Prentice Hall PTR.
2. Robert Love (2007): Linux system programming, O'Reilly Media, Inc
3. Kernighan and Pike: Unix Programming, PHI.
Bloom’s Taxonomy Levels: 1. Remember 2. Understand 3. Application 4. Analysis 5. Evaluation 6. Creation
Programme Name: BCA (Web Application Development)
Programme Specific Outcome(PSO)
PSO 1 . To train students in focused emerging areas and result in development of skills as per the demands of career opportunities in the IT sector.
PSO 2. To develop basic and advanced skills in programming of different languages and increasing their level of expertise through the specialization approach.
PSO 3 Formulate, review and analyze complex technical problems reaching conclusions using principles of mathematics , statistics, management and allied areas.
PSO 4 Learn web and mobile application development skills.
PSO 5 Learn Computer hardware with microprocessor architecture .
PSO 6 Learning Database management system along with designing ,query processing and managing databases using application programs.
PSO 7 Develop software solutions to address problems across broad range of application domains through software engineering principles.
PSO 8 Generating solutions in societal and environmental contexts.
PSO 9 Communicate effectively on topics for being able to comprehend and write effective reports and design documentation, make effective presentations, and give and
receive clear instructions.
PSO 10 Understand basic principles of data communication and networking with allied areas like intranet, internet and all communication resources with focus on
programming ,designing, analysing network applications.