Syllabus of Courses
The Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda
Faculty of Science Academic Year 2021-2022
Department of Computer Application
BCA (Software Engineering-II): Regular Programme
Core / Elective / Foundation
Year 3 Credits / Hours per week 04 Cr
BCA1501: Software Engineering-2
Year of Introduction: 2010
Semester V Maximum Marks / Grade 100
Year of Syllabus Revision: 2021
Mode of Transaction Lectures
Course Outcome (CO) BCA1501
CO1 Describe software engineering layered technology and Process frame work.
CO 2. A general understanding of software process models such as the waterfall and evolutionary models.
CO 3. Understanding of software requirements and the SRS documents.
CO 4. Understanding of the role of project management including planning, scheduling, risk management, etc.
CO 5. Describe data models, object models, context models and behavioral models.
CO 6. Understanding of different software architectural styles.
CO 7. Understanding of implementation issues such as modularity and coding standards.
Unit Topic/Unit Contact Weightage BT CO PSO Element Relevan Relation
No. Hours (%) Level s of ce to to
Employa Local Gender
bility (L)/ (G),
(Emp)/ National Environ
Entrepre (N)/ ment and
neurship Regional Sustaina
(Ent)/ (R)/Glob bility
Skill al (G) (ES),
Develop develop Human
ment mental Values
(SD) needs (HV)and
Professio
nal
Ethics
(PE)
1 Software Project Management
Metrics of process and project, Project Scheduling
14 23 1 CO1 PSO3
and tracking, Cost Estimation,Configuration Management
, Change management, Release Management Risk Manage
ment,Risk Estimation, RMMM plan
2 Agile Methods
CO2, PSO5
Agile principals, Methodology 14 23 1
CO3
Agile Models: Extreme programming, Scrum.
3 Managing Software requirements
Need for requirements managements, requirements
management techniques, Problem analysis,
Requirement Analysis, Stages of requirement
engineering, understanding user and stakeholder
needs, Defining the system, managing the scope.
Design Patterns for solving designing problems, CO4, PSO3
16 27 2, 3, 4
Describing design patterns, selecting and using CO5 PSO5
design patterns; Creational Patterns – Abstract
factory, Factory method, singleton; Structural
patterns – Adapter, decorator, Façade, Proxy;
behavioural patterns – command, mediator,
observer, state, template method
Introduction to Software Architecture
4 Quality Management
Quality concepts, Software quality assurance, Software
CO6, PSO3,
reviews, Statistical software quality assurance, Six 16 27 1, 2, 3,4
CO7 PSO2
sigma model, Software reliability, availability, and safety,
SQA plan
Reference Books
1. Software Engineering: A Practitioner's Approach by Roger S. Pressman
2. Lee Copeland: A Practitioner’s Guide to Software Test Design, Artech House
3. Erich Gamma et al.: Design Patterns: Elements of Reusable Object Oriented Software, Addison Wesley
4. Richard E Fairley: Managing and leading Software Projects, CS Press
5. Leffingwell and Widrig: Managing Software Requirements (2003): A Usecase approach, 2nd edition, Addison Wesley Professional.
6. Penny Grubb and Armstrong A. Takang: Software Maintenance: Concepts and Practices, World Scientific Publishing
7. Anne Matte Jonassen Hass: Configuration Management Principles and Practices, Addison Wesley.
Bloom’s Taxonomy Levels: 1. Remember 2. Understand 3. Application 4. Analysis 5. Evaluation 6. Creation
Programme Name: BCA
Programme Specific Outcome(PSO)
PSO1 To train students in focused emerging areas and result in development of skills as per the demands of career opportunities in the IT sector
PSO2 To develop basic and advanced skills in programming of different languages and increasing their level of expertise through the specialization approach.
PSO3 Formulate, review and analyze complex technical problems reaching conclusions using principles of mathematics , statistics, management and allied areas.
PSO4 Learn web and mobile application development skills.
PSO5 Learn Computer hardware with microprocessor architecture .
PSO6 Develop software solutions to address problems across broad range of application domains through software engineering principles.
PSO7 Generating solutions in societal and environmental contexts.
PSO8 Communicate effectively on topics for being able to comprehend and write effective reports and design documentation, make effective presentations, and give and
receive clear instructions.
PSO9 Understand basic principles of data communication and networking with allied areas like intranet, internet and all communication resources with focus on
programming ,designing, analysing network applications.
Syllabus of Courses
The Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda
Faculty of Science Academic Year 2021-22
Department of Computer Applications
BCA: Software Testing
Core / Elective / Foundation
Year III Credits / Hours per week 02
BCA XXXX: Software Testing
Year of Introduction: 2019
Semester V Maximum Marks / Grade 50
Year of Syllabus Revision:
Mode of Transaction Lectures and Tutorials
Course Outcome (CO)
CO1 You will learn the basics of creating Testing Process and Important terminologies
CO2 More specifically, you will learn the Structural Testing, Software Verification
CO3 You will learn how to create test cases from requirements
CO4 You will learn different Levels of Testing
CO5 You will also learn, how to test Web Applications, Usability Testing and Security and Performance Testing
Unit Topic/Unit Contact Weightage BT CO PSO Element Relevan Relation
No. Hours (%) Level s of ce to to
Employa Local Gender
bility (L)/ (G),
(Emp)/ National Environ
Entrepre (N)/ ment and
neurship Regional Sustaina
(Ent)/ (R)/Glob bility
Skill al (G) (ES),
Develop develop Human
ment mental Values
(SD) needs (HV)and
Professio
nal
Ethics
(PE)
1 What is testing? What should we test? Who should do
testing? Role of a tester, Reporting and analyzing bugs,
bug lifecycle.
Program and software, Verification and Validation, test
case, test suite, Alpha, Beta and Acceptance testing, Static
CO1, PSO1
and Dynamic testing, testing and Debugging 15hrs 50 1,2
CO2 PSO3
Structural Testing – Control Flow testing(Statement
coverage, Branch Coverage, Condition Coverage,
Path Coverage), Data Flow testing, Slice Based
Testing, Mutation Testing
2 Software Verification- Verification methods: Peer
PS01
CO3
Reviews, Walkthroughs, Inspection and PSO3
15hrs 50 4.5,6 CO4
Applications PSO6
CO5
Creating Test cases from requirements and Use cases
Regression Testing and prioritization of Test Cases for
Regression Testing.
Software Testing Activities
Levels of Testing- Unit Testing, Integration Testing,
System Testing and Acceptance Testing, Software
Testing Tools.
Testing Web Applications- Web Testing, Usability
Testing, Configuration and Compatibility Testing,
Security testing and Performance Testing
Reference Books
1. Software Testing- Yogesh Singh, Cambridge
2. Software Testing, A Craft’s Man Approach 4th Edition - Paul C. Jogensen. CRC Press
3. The Art of Software Testing- Glenford J .Myers, Corey Sandler, Tom Badgett. John Wiley & Sons. Inc.
Bloom’s Taxonomy Levels: 1. Remember 2. Understand 3. Application 4. Analysis 5. Evaluation 6. Creation
Programme Name
Programme Specific Outcome(PSO)
PSO1 To train students in focused emerging areas and result in development of skills as per the demands of career opportunities in the IT sector
PSO2 To develop basic and advanced skills in programming of different languages and increasing their level of expertise through the specialization approach.
PSO3 Formulate, review and analyze complex technical problems reaching conclusions using principles of mathematics , statistics, management and allied areas.
PSO4 Learn web and mobile application development skills.
PSO5 Learn Computer hardware with microprocessor architecture .
PSO6 Develop software solutions to address problems across broad range of application domains through software engineering principles.
PSO7 Generating solutions in societal and environmental contexts.
PSO8 Communicate effectively on topics for being able to comprehend and write effective reports and design documentation, make effective presentations, and give and
receive clear instructions.
PSO9 Understand basic principles of data communication and networking with allied areas like intranet, internet and all communication resources with focus on
programming ,designing, analysing network applications.