Syllabus of Courses
The Maharaja Sayajirao University of Baroda
Faculty of Science Academic Year 2021-22
Department of Computer Application
BCA: Regular Programme
Core / Elective / Foundation
Year III Credits / Hours per week 04
BCA1511: ApplicationFrameworks in .NET
Year of Introduction: 2010
Semester V Maximum Marks / Grade 100
Year of Syllabus Revision:
Mode of Transaction Lectures and Tutorials
Course Outcome (CO) BCA1511
CO1.Learn about.NET framework developed by Microsoft.
CO 2. You will be able to useWPF in C#.NET
CO 3. Create and Design the architecture and implementation of a web application using MVC.
CO4.Understand Entity Framework to connect to a database including Microsoft SQL Server using LINQ Operations
CO 5. To be able to create Web Services in .NET using C#.
CO 6. To understand .NETCore and features over .NET previous versions
CO 7. To develop Applications in .NET, Mobile Application Development (Xamarin).
Unit Topic/Unit Conta Weightage BT CO PSO Element Relevan Relation
No. ct (%) Level s of ce to to
Hour Employa Local Gender
s bility (L)/ (G),
(Emp)/ National Environ
Entrepre (N)/ ment and
neurship Regional Sustaina
(Ent)/ (R)/Glob bility
Skill al (G) (ES),
Develop develop Human
ment mental Values
(SD) needs (HV)and
Professio
nal
Ethics
(PE)
1 Overview of WPF
Windows Presentation Foundation – WPF Controls, Layout,
Overview of XAML, Events and Data binding, Style,
Navigation, Animation and Media, 3D Graphics,
CO1, PS02,P
MVC Framework 22 36% 1,2, 3, 6 CO2, S03,PS
MVC Architecture, Designing Models, Controllers and CO3 04
Views, Writing Controllers and Actions, Creating Views
with razor syntax, Validate MVC Application, MVC
Authentication, MVC Routing
2 Entity Framework
Understanding of Entity Framework, Workflow in EF, Entity
Data Model, EF Architecture, DbContext, Types of Entities,
Relationships with Entity Framework, Entity State,
PS02,P
Development Approaches for EF, CRUD Operations in
18 30% 1,2,4,5,6 CO4, S03,PS
Entity Framework
04
LINQ
Common LINQ Operations – Projection and filtering,
Sorting data, Set operations, Quantifiers and Partitioning,
Aggregation operation, LINQ to Entities, LINQ to XML
3 Overview of WCF
PS02,P
Windows Communication Foundation for implementation of
12 20% 1,2,3,6 CO5 S03,PS
SOA, addresses, bindings, and contracts. Creating and
04
launching a service, consuming a service.
4 Introducing .NET Core
PS01,P
Features of .NET Core, Traditional .NET Framework vs CO6, S02,PS
08 14% 1,4,5,6
.NET Core, creating application in .NET Core, Targeting CO7 03,PS0
multiple frameworks, Introduction to Xamarin 4,PS05
Reference Books
1. Programming WPF (2nd Edition) - Chris Sells and Ian Griffiths, O’Reilly
2. Programming ASP.NET MVC 4 - Jess Chadwick, Todd Snyder, and Hrusikesh Panda, O’Reilly
3. Professional ADO.NET 3.5 with LINQ and the Entity Framework - Roger Jennings, Wrox
4. Microsoft ADO.NET Entity Framework Step by Step – John Paul Mueller
5. Learning WCF - Michele Leroux Bustamante. O’Reilly
Bloom’s Taxonomy Levels: 1. Remember 2. Understand 3. Application 4. Analysis 5. Evaluation 6. Creation
Programme Name: BCA
Programme Specific Outcome(PSO)
PSO 1 To train students in focused emerging areas and result in development of skills as per the demands of career opportunities in the IT sector
PSO 2 To develop basic and advanced skills in programming of different languages and increasing their level of expertise through the specialization approach.
PSO 3 Formulate, review and analyze complex technical problems reaching conclusions using principles of mathematics , statistics, management and allied areas.
PSO 4 Learn web and mobile application development skills.
PSO 5 Learn computer hardware with microprocessor architecture.
PSO 6 Learning Database management system along with designing, query processing and managing databases using application programs.
PSO 7 Develop software solutions to address problems across broad range of application domains through software engineering principles.
PSO 8 Generating solutions in societal and environmental contexts.
PSO 9 Communicate effectively on topics for being able to comprehend and write effective reports and design documentation, make effective presentations, and give and
receive clear instructions.
PSO 10 Understand basic principles of data communication and networking with allied areas like intranet, internet and all communication resources with focus on
programming ,designing, analysing network applications.