Course Code : ECPE13
Course Title : COMPUTER ARCHITECTURE AND ORGANIZATION
Number of Credits 3
Prerequisites : NONE
(Course code)
Course Type : PE
Course Learning Objectives
 To understand how computers are constructed out of a set of functional units and how the
functional units operate, interact, and communicate.
 To make the students to understand the concept of interfacing memory and various I/O
devices to a computer system using a suitable bus system.
Course Content
Introduction: Function and structure of a computer, Functional components of a Computer,
Interconnection of components, Performance of a computer.
Representation of Instructions: Machine instructions, Memory locations & Addresses, Operands,
Addressing modes, Instruction formats, Instruction sets, Instruction set architectures - CISC and RISC
architectures, Super scalar Architectures, Fixed point and floating point operations.
Basic Processing Unit: Fundamental concepts, ALU, Control unit, Multiple bus organization,
Hardwired control, Micro programmed control, Pipelining, Data hazards, Instruction hazards,
Influence on instruction sets, Data path and control considerations, Performance considerations.
Memory organization: Basic concepts, Semiconductor RAM memories, ROM, Speed - Size and cost,
Memory Interfacing circuits, Cache memory, Improving cache performance, Memory management
unit, Shared/Distributed Memory, Cache coherency in multiprocessor, Segmentation, Paging,
Concept of virtual memory, Address translation, Secondary storage devices.
I/O Organization: Accessing I/O devices, Input/output programming, Interrupts, Exception Handling,
DMA, Buses, I/O interfaces- Serial port, Parallel port, PCI bus, SCSI bus, USB bus, Firewall and
Infinity band, I/O peripherals.
Text Books
1. C.Hamacher Z. Vranesic S. Zaky and Manjikian, "Computer Organization and Embedded
Systems", 6 th Edition, McGraw-Hill, 2012.
2. W. Stallings, "Computer Organization and Architecture - Designing for Performance", 8Th
Edition, Prentice Hall of India, 2010.
Reference Books
1. B,Parhami, “Computer Architecture, From Microprocessors to Supercomputers,” Oxford
University Press, Reprint 2014.
2. J. L. Hennessy and D. A. Patterson, "Computer Architecture, A Quantitative Approach”, 5
th Edition, Morgan Kaufmann,2012.
3. J .P. Hayes, "Computer Architecture and Organization", 3 rd Edition, McGraw-Hill, 1998.
4. Recent literature in Computer Architecture and Organization.
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able to
CO1: apply the basic knowledge of digital concept to the functional components of a Computer
System.
CO2: analyze the addressing mode concepts and design the instruction set Architecture.
CO3: identify the functions of various processing units within the CPU of a Computer System.
CO4: analyze the function of the memory management unit and create suitable memory interface
to the CPU.
CO5: recognize the need for recent Bus standards and I/O devices.
35 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015