CE201 Mechanics of Solids-I 2 1 0 3
CE201 MECHANICS OF SOLIDS – I
Course objectives:
To learn about the concept of stress, strain and deformation of solid and state of stress
4
Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
To know the concepts of strain energy, principal stress and principal planes
To learn the bending moment, shear force and the corresponding stress distribution for
different types of beams
To learn the analysis of plane truss, thin cylinders and shells
To understand the theory of torsion and stresses in springs
Course Content
Tension, compression and shear stresses - Hooke's law - elastic constants - compound stresses -
composite bars - thermal stresses.
Strain Energy due to axial force - Resilience - stresses due to impact and suddenly applied load -
Principal stress and principal planes - Mohr's circle
Beams and support conditions -Types of supports and loads - shear force and bending moment - their
diagrams for simply supported beams, cantilevers and overhanging beams. Theory of simple bending -
Stress distribution at a cross section due to Bending Moment and Shear - strain energy.
Analysis of plane truss - Method of joints - Method of sections - Thin cylinders and shells.
Theory of torsion - Torsion of circular and hollow circular shafts and shear stresses due to torsion -
closed and open coiled helical springs - leaf spring.
References
1. Vazirani, V.N. and Ratwani, N.M., Strength of Materials, Vol I, Khanna Publishers, 1996.
2. Kazimi, Mechanics of Solids, Tata McGraw - Hill, 2004.
3. Timoshenko, S.P. and Gere, J.M., Mechanics of Materials, Tata McGraw Hill, 1992.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
determine the strength parameters of the materials
solve principal stress and principal plane problems
apply various methods of analysis of plane truss
determine shear force, bending moment, bending and shear stress distribution
analyze members subjected to torsion