CE310 Water Resources Engineering 3 0 0 3
Elective - 1 3 0 0 3
CE310 WATER RESOURCES ENGINEERING
Course Objectives:
To build on the student’s background in hydrology and hydraulics and understanding of water
resources systems
To develop the skills in modeling of flood flows and flood routing
To develop skills in the ground water flow, type of aquifer and yield from the well
To provide the knowledge of design of reservoir, operation and sedimentation
To study the effect, causes and remedial measures of water logging
Course Content
Hydrologic cycle - rainfall and its measurement - computation of mean rainfall over a catchment area
using arithmetic mean, Theissen polygon and Isohyetal methods - Runoff -infiltration indices - Storm
Hydrograph and unit hydrograph
River regions and their characteristics - classification of rivers on alluvial plains - meandering of rivers -
river training
Reservoir planning - Investigations - zones of storage in a reservoir - single purpose and multipurpose
reservoir - determination of storage capacity and yield - reservoir sedimentation - Reservoir life -
Sediment prevention - Flood estimation- Flood forecasting - Flood routing
28
Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
Ground water - types of aquifers - storage coefficient - coefficient of transmissibility - steady radial flow
into a well located in an unconfined and confined aquifers - Tube wells and Open wells - yield from an
open well.
Water logging - causes and effects of water logging - remedial measures - land reclamation - land
drainage - benefits - classification of drains - surface drains - subsurface drains - design principles and
maintenance of drainage systems.
References
1. Punmia, B.C., Irrigation and Water Power Engineering, Standard Publishers, 2001.
2. Ragunath. H.M., Hydrology, Willey Eastern Limited, New Delhi, 2000.
3. Subramanya, Engineering Hydrology, Tata-McGraw Hill, 2004.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
design various channel systems
design head and cross regulator structures
identify various types of reservoir and their design aspects
By the Establishes the understanding of cross drainage works and its design
design different types of dams