CE451 Experimental Stress Analysis 3 0 0 3
CE451 EXPERIMENTAL STRESS ANALYSIS
Course objectives:
To study the working principles of different types of strain gauges
37
Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
To understand the model analysis
To know the fundamentals of photo elastic coatings
To study the effects of 2-D photo elasticity
To study the working principle of load, pressure and displacement transducers
Course Content
Strain gauges – Mechanical, optical, acoustic, electrical inductance and capacitance pneumatic types –
description and working principles
Electrical resistance strain gauges, gauge characteristics and types – Equipment for recording static
strain – reduction of strain gauge data.
Load, pressure and displacement transducers.
Model analysis – direct and indirect models – law of structural similitude – choice of scales – Model
materials – limitations of model studies –Buckingham PI theorem – design of direct and indirect models
– Beggs deformeter and its applications.
Two dimensional photo – elasticity – optical principles stress optic law – Methods of producing isoclines
and isochromatics using polariscopes – Methods of measuring fractional fringe orders – model
materials – separation techniques
Fundamental of Photo elastic coatings, Moire fringe and brittle coating techniques – Introduction to
stress freezing techniques – Introduction to non-destructive testings
References
1. Daley and Riley, Experimental Stress Analysis, McGraw Hill Book Company, 1987
2. Srinath, L.S. et al., Experimental Stress Analysis, Tata McGraw Hill 1984.
3. Hetenyi, M., Hand Book of Experimental Stress Analysis, John Wiley & Sons. Inc New York. 1980.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
identify the different types of strain gauges
carry out model analysis
apply the concepts of photo elastic coatings
analyze the behavior of 2-D photo elasticity
apply the working principles of transducers