Course Code : ICPE34
Course Title : Instrumentation for Agricultural and Food
Processing Industries
Type of Course : PE
Prerequisites : ICPC17
Contact Hours : 42 (3 credits)
Course Assessment Methods : Continuous Assessment, End Assessment
Course Learning Objectives (CLO)
CLO1 To provide an understanding on the need of instrumentation in agriculture and
food processing sector.
CLO2 To provide an understanding of food quality assessment and instruments used for
the same.
CLO3 To provide an understanding on agriculture associated activities and instruments
used for the same.
CLO4 To provide some knowledge in food processing equipment.
Course Content
Introduction: Necessity of instrumentation and control for food processing and agriculture
sensor requirement, remote sensing, biosensors in Agriculture, standards for food quality.
Instrumentation for food quality assurance: Instrumental measurements and sensory
parameters. Inline measurement for the control of food processing operations: color
measurements of food, food composition analysis using infrared, microwave measurements
of product variables, pressure and temperature measurement in food process control, level
and flow measurement in food process control, ultrasonic instrumentation in food industry.
Instrumental techniques in the quality control, Major Processes: Flow diagram of sugar plant,
sensors and instrumentation set-up for it, Oil extraction plant and instrumentation set-up, Juice
extraction control set-up.
Instrumentation for Agriculture: Irrigation systems: necessity, irrigation methods: overhead,
centre pivot, lateral move, micro irrigation systems and it’s performance, comparison of
different irrigation systems, soil moisture measurement methods. Major Processes:
Application of SCADA for DAM parameters and control, Water distribution and management
control, Auto-Drip irrigation systems, Irrigation Canal management, upstream and
downstream control concepts, supervisory control.
Green houses and Instrumentation: Ventilation, cooling and heating wind speed, temperature
and humidity, rain gauge, carbon dioxide enrichment measurement and control.
Design considerations of agricultural and food Processing Equipments: Design of Food
Processing equipments, dryers, design of dryers PHTC, RPEC, LSU and Drum Dryer,
determination of heat and air requirement for drying grains.
References
1. Erika Kress-Rogers, Christopher J.B. Brimelow., Instrumentation and Sensors for the
Food Industry, Woodhead Publishing, 2001 .
2. Manabendra Bhuyan., Measurement and control in food processing, CRC/Taylor
and Francis Publications, 2007
3. P.J. Fellows, Food Processing Technology Principles and Practice, Woodhead
Publishing, 3rdEdition, 2009.
4. Semioh Otles, Methods of analysis of food components and additives, CRC Press,
Taylor and Francis group, 2nd Edition, 2012.
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 137 | P age
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli
5. McMillan G. K., Considine D. M., Process/Industrial Instruments and Controls
Handbook, McGraw Hill International, 5th edition,1999.
6. Liptak B. G., Instrument Engineers Handbook, Process Measurement Volume I and
Process Control Volume II, CRC press, 4th Edition,2005.
7. Hall C. W., Olsen W. C, The literature of Agriculture Engineering, Cornell University
Press, 1992.
8. Sahu J. K., Fundamentals of Food Process Engineering, Alpha Science Intl Ltd, 2016.
9. G.E. Meyer and Yufeng Ge., Instrumentation and Controls for Agricultural and
Biological Engineering Applications, using LabVIEW® and other Modern tools as
Support Systems, (2008)
Course Outcomes (CO)
On completion of this course, the students will be able to,
CO1 Understand the necessity of instrumentation in agriculture and food processing.
CO2 Have familiarity with instrumentation requirement in agriculture and food processing.
CO3 Analyse and design systems/instruments for agriculture and food processing.
CO4 Understand problems in agriculture and food processing and provide technological
solution to the same.
Course Outcome and Programme Outcome Mapping
0 1 2 1 2 3
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 1 1 O O O
O O O O O O O O O O O O S S S
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
CO1 2 2 2 2 2 - - - 3 3 3 2 2 2 1
CO2 2 2 2 2 2 - - - 3 3 3 2 2 2 1
CO3 3 3 3 3 3 - - - 2 2 2 3 3 3 -
CO4 - - - - - 3 3 3 1 1 1 - - - 3
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 138 | P age
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli