Course Code : ECHO19
Course Title : ANALOG IC DESIGN
Number of Credits 3
Prerequisites : ECPC20
(Course code)
Course Type : HO
Course learning Objectives
 To develop the ability design and analyze MOS based Analog VLSI circuits to draw the
equivalent circuits of MOS based Analog VLSI and analyse their performance.
 To develop the skills to design analog VLSI circuits for a given specification.
Course content
Basic MOS Device Physics – General Considerations, MOS I/V Characteristics, Second Order
effects, MOS Device models. Short Channel Effects and Device Models. Single Stage Amplifiers –
Basic Concepts, Common Source Stage, Source Follower, Common Gate Stage, Cascode Stage.
Differential Amplifiers – Single Ended and Differential Operation, Basic Differential Pair, Common-
Mode Response, Differential Pair with MOS loads, Gilbert Cell. Passive and Active Current Mirrors
– Basic Current Mirrors, Cascode Current Mirrors, Active Current Mirrors.
Frequency Response of Amplifiers – General Considerations, Common Source Stage, Source
Followers, Common Gate Stage, Cascode Stage, Differential Pair. Noise – Types of Noise,
Representation of Noise in circuits, Noise in single stage amplifiers, Noise in Differential Pairs.
Feedback Amplifiers – General Considerations, Feedback Topologies, Effect of Loading.
Operational Amplifiers – General Considerations, One Stage Op Amps, Two Stage Op Amps, Gain
Boosting, Common-Mode Feedback, Input Range limitations, Slew Rate, Power Supply Rejection,
Noise in Op Amps. Stability and Frequency Compensation.
Band gap References, Introduction to Switched Capacitor Circuits, Nonlinearity and Mismatch.
Text Books
1. B.Razavi, “Design of Analog CMOS Integrated Circuits”, McGraw Hill Edition2002.
2. Paul. R.Gray, Robert G. Meyer, “Analysis and Design of Analog Integrated Circuits”,
Wiley, (4/e), 2001.
Reference Books
1. D. A. Johns and K. Martin, “Analog Integrated Circuit Design”, Wiley,1997.
2. R. Jacob Baker, “CMOS Circuit Design, Layout, and Simulation”, Wiley, (3/e),2010.
3. P.E.Allen, D.R. Holberg, “CMOS Analog Circuit Design”, Oxford University Press,2002.
4. Recent literature in Analog IC Design.
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able
CO1: draw the equivalent circuits of MOS based Analog VLSI and analyze their performance.
CO2: design analog VLSI circuits for a givenspecification.
CO3: Analyse the frequency response of the different configurations of a amplifier.
CO4: Understand the feedback topologies involved in the amplifierdesign.
CO5: Appreciate the design features of the differentialamplifiers.
137 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015