Course Code : ICPE13
Course Title : Digital Image Processing
Type of Course : PE
Prerequisites : ICPC13, ICPC24
Contact Hours : 42 (3 credits)
Course Assessment Methods : Continuous Assessment, End Assessment
Course Learning Objectives (CLO)
CLO1 To introduce the fundamentals of image processing
CLO2 To introduce to the concept of image restoration and reconstructions
CLO3 To introduce the concepts of image segmentation and compressions
CLO4 To impart knowledge on the design and realization of various image processing
algorithms.
Course Content
Introduction and Digital Image Fundamentals:
Introduction to image processing, origin, examples of fields, steps in image processing,
components of image processing system, digital image fundamentals – elements of visual
perception, light and electromagnetic spectrum, image sensing and acquisition, mathematical
tools used in image processing.
Intensity Transformations, Spatial Filtering and Filtering in frequency domain:
Basics intensity transformation functions, histogram processing, fundamentals of spatial
filtering, smoothing and sharpening spatial filtering, combinations of image enhancement
method, filtering in the frequency domain – Fourier transform of sample functions, DFT of one
variable, extension to two variables, properties of 2 D DFTs, selective filtering, realization of
FDT, FFT, filter design aspects.
Image Restoration and Reconstruction:
Model of the image degradation / restoration process, noise models, restoration in the
presence of noise only – spatial filtering, periodic noise reduction by frequency domain
filtering, estimating the degradation functions, inverse filtering, image reconstruction from
projections.
Image Segmentation:
Image segmentation - point, line and edge detection, Thresholding, Regions Based
segmentation, segmentation using morphological watersheds, usage of motion in
segmentation, edge linking and boundary detection, Hough transform, chain codes, boundary
segments, skeletons, boundary descriptors, Fourier descriptors.
Image Compression:
Image compression - image compression - data redundancies elements of information,
variable-length coding, predictive coding, transform coding, image compression standards,
wavelets and multi-resolution processing - image pyramids, sub-band coding.
Object Recognition and Case studies:
Object Recognition- patterns and pattern classes, recognition based on decision – theoretic
methods, structural methods, case studies – image analysis
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 95 | Pa ge
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli
References
1. Gonzalez and Woods, Digital Image Processing, Pearson education, 4th Edition, 2017.
2. Jain Anil K., Fundamentals of Digital Image Processing, Prentice Hall India, 4th Edition,
1989.
3. Milan Sonka, Vaclav Hlavav, Roger Boyle, Image Processing, Analysis and Machine
Vision, Cengage Learning, 4td Edition, 2014.
4. Rangaraj M. Rangayyan, Biomedical Image Analysis, CRC Press, 2005.
5. Pratt W.K, Digital Image Processing, Wiley-Interscience, 4th Edition, 2007.
Course Outcomes (CO)
On completion of this course, the students will be able to,
CO1 Understand the importance of image processing
CO2 Perform image restoration and reconstruction
CO3 Perform image segmentation and compressions
CO4 Design, realize and troubleshoot various algorithms for the case studies based on
image processing
Course Outcome and Programme Outcome Mapping
0 1 2 1 2 3
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 1 1 O O O
O O O O O O O O O O O O S S S
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
CO1 3 3 3 3 3 - - - 2 2 2 3 3 3 -
CO2 3 3 3 3 3 - - - 2 2 2 3 3 3 -
CO3 3 3 3 3 3 - - - 2 2 2 3 3 3 -
CO4 2 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 3 3 3 2 2 2 1
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 96 | Pa ge
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli