Course Code : ECHO34
Course Title : ADVANCED DIGITAL SIGNAL PROCESSING
Number of Credits 4
Prerequisites : ECPC15
(Course code)
Course Type : HO
Course learning Objective
 To provide rigorous foundations in discrete-time stochastic process, optimum filter,
adaptive filter, power spectrum estimation and frequency estimation.
Course content
Discrete-Time Random Process : Random Process: Ensemble average, Gaussian processes,
Stationary process, autocovariance and autocorrelation matrices, ergodicity, white noise, power
spectrum. Filtering random processes. Spectral factorization. ARMA, AR and MA processes.
Harmonic processes. Linear mean square estimation. Parameter estimation Bias and consistency.
Optimum Linear filter and linear prediction : FIR Wiener filter. Orthogonality principle in linear
mean square estimation. IIR Wiener filter: Non-causal Wiener filter and causal Wiener filter. Linear
prediction. Forward and backward linear prediction. Levinson-Durbin algorithm.
Adaptive Filters : Adaptive filters. FIR adaptive filter. The steepest decent adaptive filter. LMS
algorithm. Convergence of adaptive algorithms. Normalized LMS algorithm. Adaptive noise
cancellation. Exponentially weighted RLS algorithm
Power Spectrum Estimation: Spectrum estimation. Estimation of autocorrelation. Periodogram
method. Performance of the periodogram. Nonparametric methods: Bartlett’s method, Welch method
and Blackman-Tukey method. Performance comparisons. Minimum variance spectrum estimation.
Parametric methods: AR spectrum estimation. Model parameter-Yule Walker equations.
Frequency Estimation: Eigen analysis of autocorrelation matrix. Pisarenko Harmonic
Decomposition. MUSIC method. ESPRIT method. Minimum variance frequency estimation.
Propagator method.
Text Books
1. M.H.Hayes,” Statistical Digital Signal Processing and Modeling”, John-Wiley, 2001.
2. S.Haykin, “Adaptive Filter Theory (4/e)”, Prentice- Hall, 2002.
Reference Books
1. D.G.Manolakis, V. K. Ingle, and S. M. Kogon ,”Statistical and Adaptive Signal Processing”,
McGraw-Hill,2005
2. S.L.Marple,”Digital Spectral Analysis”, 1987.
3. Recent literature in Advanced Digital Signal Processing.
153 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able
CO1: To understand and analyze discrete-time random processes and employ the concept of
stochastic processes to analyses linear systems
CO2: To select linear filtering and prediction techniques to engineering problems.
CO3: To describe the most important adaptive filter generic problems and various adaptive filter
algorithms.
CO4: To derive and analyses the statistical properties of the conventional spectral estimators,
nonparametric and parametric estimation method.
CO5: To select an appropriate array processing algorithm for frequency estimation
154 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015