Course Code : ICOE13
Course Title : Measurement and Control
Type of Course : Open Elective (OE)
Prerequisites : --
Contact Hours : 42 (3 credits)
Course Assessment : Continuous Assessments, Assignments, Final
Methods Assessment
Course Learning Objectives (CLO)
CLO1 To impart knowledge in the basics of measurement system.
CLO2 To expose the students to various measurement techniques used for the
measurement of important process variables.
CLO3 To expose the students to the basics of control systems.
Course Content
Fundamental and Importance of Instrumentation, types of instruments, selection of
instruments, performance of instruments, error in measurement, calibration and standard,
Calibration of instruments: Methods and analysis, Introduction to Transducer and types,
Process Instrumentation, recording instruments, indicating and recording Instruments.
Strain and Displacement Measurement:
Factors affecting strain measurements, Types of strain gauges, theory of operation, strain
gauge materials, gauging techniques and other factors, strain gauge circuits and applications
of strain gauges. Resistive potentiometer (Linear, circular and helical), L.V.D.T., R.V.D.T. and
their characteristics, variable inductance and capacitance transducers, Piezo electrical
transducers, Hall Effect devices and Proximity sensors.
Pressure and Temperature Measurement:
Mechanical devices like Diaphragm, Bellows, and Bourdon tube for pressure measurement,
Variable inductance and capacitance transducers, Piezo electric transducers, L.V.D.T. for
measurement of pressure.
Resistance type temperature sensors – RTD and Thermistor, Thermocouples and
Thermopiles, Laws of thermocouple, Fabrication of industrial thermocouples, Radiation
methods of temperature measurement.
Flow and Level Measurement:
Differential pressure meters like Orifice plate, Venturi tube, flow nozzle, Pitot tube,
Rotameter, Turbine flow meter, Electromagnetic flow meter, Ultrasonic flowmeter.
Resistive, inductive and capacitive techniques for level measurement, Ultrasonic
methods, Air purge system (Bubbler method).
Elements of control systems, concept of open loop and closed loop systems, Examples and
application of open loop and closed loop systems, brief idea of multivariable control systems.
Brief idea of proportional, derivative and integral controllers.
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 218 | P age
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli
References
1. D Patranabis, Principles of Industrial Instrumentation, Mc Graw hill, 3rdedition. 2017
2. A. K. Ghosh, Introduction to Instrumentation and Control, PHI publications, 4thedition.
2012
3. Nakra Chaudhari, Instrumentation measurement and analysis, Mc Graw hill,
3rdedition.2017
4. S. K. Bhattacharya, Control Systems Theory and Applications,Pearson.2013
5. N. C. Jagan, Control Systems, BSPublications.2016
6. S. K. Singh, Industrial Instrumentation andControl, TMH Publication.2010.
7. Thomos G. Beckwith and Lewis Back N. Adison Wesely Longman, Mechanical
Measurements, Harlow.1993
8. E. D. Doeblin, Measurement Systems: Application and Design, McGraw – Hill
Publication 2019.
9. I. J. Nagrath and M. Gopal, Control Systems Engineering, New Age International
(P) Limited, Publishers.2025
10. N. K. Sinha, Control Systems, New Age International (P) LimitedPublishers.2013.
Course Outcomes (CO)
On completion of this course, the students will be able to,
CO1 Familiar with the basics of measurement system, its characteristics and principles
of few transducers.
CO2 Familiar with the different temperature, pressure, flow and level measurement
techniques used in process industries.
CO3 Able to select and make measurements of temperature, flow, pressure and level in
any process industry.
CO4 Familiar with the concept of closed loop control system.
Course Outcome and Programme Outcome Mapping
0 1 2 1 2 3
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 1 1 O O O
O O O O O O O O O O O O S S S
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
CO1 3 3 3 3 3 3 2 2 - - - 3 3 3 -
CO2 3 3 3 3 2 3 2 2 - - - 3 3 3 -
CO3 3 3 3 3 2 3 2 2 - - - 3 3 3 -
CO4 3 3 3 3 3 3 2 2 - - - 3 3 3 -
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 219 | P age
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli