Course Code : ICOE17
Course Title : Network Control Systems
Type of Course : Open Elective (OE)
Prerequisites : --
Contact Hours : 42 (3 credits)
Course Assessment : Continuous Assessments, Assignments, Final
Methods Assessment
Course Learning Objectives (CLO)
CLO1 To expose the students to the emerging field of multi-agent and network control
systems
CLO2 To expand the scope of traditional control systems to include large-scale
interconnected systems
CLO3 To demonstrate consensus and leader-follower paradigms in a distributed
environment
CLO4 To introduce different applications that fall in the gamut of network control systems.
Course Content
Introduction to multi-agent systems, Information exchange via local interactions, Basics of
graph theory
Reaching agreement in undirected and directed networks, Agreement via Lyapunov
functions, Agreement over random networks
Formation control, Shape based control, Dynamic formation selection, Assigning roles,
Cooperative robotics, Wireless sensor networks
Graph theoretic controllability, Network formation, Optimizing the weighted agreement,
Planning over proximity graphs, Higher order networks
Introduction to social networks, opinion dynamics, epidemics, games etc.
References
1. M ehran Mesbahi and Magnus Egerstedt, Graph Theoretic Methods in Multiagent
Networks, Princeton University Press, 2010.
2. F . Bullo, J. Cortes, and S. Martinez, Princeton, Distributed Control of Robotic
Networks, University Press, 2009.
3. P . J. Antsaklis and P. Tabuada, Networked Embedded Sensing and Control, Springer,
2006.
4. A .L. Barabasi, Network Science, Cambridge University Press, 2016
Course Outcomes (CO)
On completion of this course, the students will be able to,
CO1 Design control system in the presence of quantization, network delay or packet loss.
CO2 Understand distributed estimation and control suited for network control system.
CO3 Develop simple application suited for network control systems.
CO4 Technically understand larger-scale techno-socio-economic networks and models
prevalent in today’s society.
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 226 | P age
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli
Course Outcome and Programme Outcome Mapping
0 1 2 1 2 3
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 1 1 O O O
O O O O O O O O O O O O S S S
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
CO1
CO2
CO3
CO4
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 227 | P age
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli