Course Code : ICPE40
Course Title : Fault Detection and Diagnosis
Type of Course : PE
Prerequisites : ICPC21
Contact Hours : 42 (3 credits)
Course Assessment Methods : Continuous Assessment, End Assessment
Course Learning Objectives (CLO)
CLO1 To impart knowledge in fault detection and identification.
CLO2 To introduce different structure residual technique for the fault identification.
CLO3 To introduce different directional residual technique for the fault identification.
CLO4 To impart the knowledge in soft computation technique based FDI design
Course Content
Introduction to Fault Detection and Diagnosis: Scope of FDD: Types of faults and different
tasks of Fault Diagnosis and Implementation - Different approaches to FDD: Model free and
Model based approaches. Classification of Fault and Disturbances- Different issues involved
in FDD- Typical applications.
Analytical Redundancy Concepts: Introduction- Mathematical representation of Fault and
Disturbances: Additive and Multiplicative types – Residual Generation: Detection, Isolation,
Computational and stability properties – Design of Residual generator – Residual specification
and Implementation.
Design of Structured Residuals: Introduction- Residual structure of single fault Isolation:
Structural and Canonical structures- Residual structure of multiple fault Isolation: Diagonal
and Full Row canonical concepts – Introduction to parity equation implementation and
alternative representation.
Design of Directional Residuals: Introduction – Directional Specifications: Directional
specification with and without disturbances – Parity Equation Implementation – Linearly
dependent column.
Advanced level issues and design involved in FDD: Introduction of Residual generation of
parametric fault – Robustness Issues –Statistical Testing of Residual generators – Application
of Neural and Fuzzy logic schemes in FDD – Case study.
References
1. Janos J. Gertler, Fault Detection and Diagnosis in Engineering systems, Macel
Dekker, 2nd Edition, 1998.
2. Rolf Isermann, Fault-Diagnosis Systems: An Introduction from Fault Detection to Fault
Tolerance, Springer Verlag, 2011.
3. Sachin. C. Patwardhan, Fault Detection and Diagnosis in Industrial Process –
Lecture Notes, IIT Bombay, February 2005.
4. Rami S. Mangoubi, Robust Estimation and Failure detection. Springer-Verlag-London
1998.
5. Steven X. Ding, Model based Fault Diagnosis Techniques: Schemes, Algorithms, and
Tools, Springer Publication, 2012.
6. Hassan Noura, Didier Theilliol, Jean-Christophe Ponsart, Abbas Chamseddine, Fault
Tolerant Control Systems: Design and Practical Applications, Springer Publication,
2009.
Mogens Blanke, Michel Kinnaert, Jan Lunze, Marcel Staroswiecki., Diagnosis and
7.
Fault-Tolerant Control, Springer, 2016.
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 149 | P age
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli
Course Outcomes (CO)
On completion of this course, the students will be able to,
CO1 Identify the different type of faults occurred in a system.
CO2 Apply mathematical techniques to detect faults.
CO3 Apply structured and directional techniques for FDI design.
CO4 Apply soft computation technique for FDI development.
Course Outcome and Programme Outcome Mapping
0 1 2 1 2 3
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 1 1 O O O
O O O O O O O O O O O O S S S
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
CO1 3 3 3 3 3 2 2 - - - - - 3 3
CO2 3 3 3 3 3 2 2 - - - - - 3 3
CO3 3 3 3 3 3 2 2 - - - - - 3 3
CO4 3 3 3 3 3 2 2 - - - - - 3 3
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 150 | P age
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli