Course Code : ICIR19
Course Title : Industrial Lecture
Type of Course : IR
Prerequisites : --
Contact Hours : (1 credit)
Course Assessment Methods : Quizzes at the end of each of the industrial lectures
Course Learning Objectives (CLO)
CLO1 To make the student relate theoretical knowledge and concepts in Instrumentation
and Control Engineering to practical relevance and applications in the industry.
CLO2 To enable the student, learn about contemporary problems faced by the industry
and systematic approaches in solving them.
CLO3 To provide a platform for the student to interact with experts from industries and
research and development organizations.
CLO4 To make the student aware of different application areas in the industry and explore
about different career paths relevant to Instrumentation and Control Engineering.
Course Regulation
A course based on industrial lectures shall be offered for 1 credit during the prefinal year of
study in B.Tech.. A minimum of five lectures of two hours’ duration by industry experts will be
arranged by the Department.
The evaluation methodology, will in general, be based on quizzes at the end of each lecture.
Due weightage shall be given to attendance also. The HoD or her/his nominee may devise a
suitable methodology for evaluation and the same would be informed to the students before
the commencement of the semester.
Course Outcomes (CO)
On completion of the Industrial lectures, the student will be able to
CO1 Connect theoretical concepts in Instrumentation and Control Engineering to
practical relevance and applications in the industry.
CO2 Get exposure on various challenges faced by the modern industry and the
systematic approaches to tackle them.
CO3 Enhance comprehension and communication skills during interactions with experts
from the industry.
CO4 List various career paths and roles in the industry relevant to Instrumentation and
Control Engineering.
Course Outcome and Programme Outcome Mapping
0 1 2 1 2 3
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 1 1 O O O
O O O O O O O O O O O O S S S
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
CO1 3 3 3 2 2 _- - - - - - 3 3 3 1
CO2 3 3 3 3 2 3 2 3 2 2 2 3 3 3 2
CO3
_ _ _ _ _ 2 2 3 3 3 _ 2 _ 2 3
CO4 2 _ 2 3 3 2 _ 2 2 3 3 2 2 2 3
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 40 | Pa ge
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli
PROGRAMME CORE (PC) COURSES
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 41 | Pa ge
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli