Course Code : ECMI16
Course Title : TRANSMISSION LINES AND WAVEGUIDES
Number of Credits 3
Prerequisites : ECMI12
(Course code)
Course Type : MI
Course Learning Objective
 To expose students to the complete fundamentals and essential feature of waveguides,
resonators and microwave components and also able to give an introduction to microwave
integrated circuit design.
Course Content
Classification of guided wave solutions-TE, TM and TEM waves. Field analysis transmission lines.
Rectangular and circular waveguides. Excitation of waveguides. Rectangular and circular cavity
resonators.
Transmission line equations. Voltage and current waves. Solutions for different terminations.
Transmission-line loading.
Impedance transformation and matching. Smith Chart, Quarter-wave and half-wave transformers.
Binomial and T-chebeyshev transformers. Single, double and triple stub matching.
Microstriplines, stripline, slot lines, coplanar waveguide and fin line. Micro strip MIC design aspects.
Computer- aided analysis and synthesis.
Text Books
1. D.M.Pozar, “Microwave Engineering (3/e)” Wiley, 2004.
2. J.D.Ryder, “Networks, Lines and Fields”, PHI, 2003.
Reference Books
1. R.E.Collin, “Foundations for Microwave Engineering (2/e)”, McGraw-Hill, 2002.
2. S.Y.Liao, “Microwave Devices and Circuits”, (3/e) PHI, 2005.
3. J. A. Seeger, “Microwave Theory, Components, and Devices” Prentice-Hall-A division of
Simon & Schuster Inc Englewood Cliffs, New Jersy 07632, 1986.
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able
CO1: classify the Guided Wave solutions -TE, TM, and TEM.
CO2: analyze and design rectangular waveguides and understand the propagation of
electromagnetic waves.
CO3: evaluate the resonance frequency of cavity Resonators and the associated modal field.
CO4: analyze the transmission lines and their parameters using the Smith Chart.
CO5: apply the knowledge to understand various planar transmission lines.
108 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015