Course Code : ECPE11
Course Title : Wireless Local Area Networks (WLAN)
Number of Credits 3
Prerequisites (Course : ECPE10
code)
Course Type : PE
Course Objective: To expose students to wireless local area network standards, technologies, and
operations with real-life traces to correlate with the concepts
Course Contents
WLAN Introduction and Basics - 802.11 protocol stack basics, RF spectrum of operations, unlicensed
band usage, Types of networks and their usage, Role of Wi-Fi alliance. Exercises: Survey of WLAN
products in consumer appliances.
Evolution of WLAN Layer. The ISM PHYs: FH, DS and HR/DS, basics ofOFDM design and
parameters for WLAN, MIMO usage in WLAN, Throughput enahancements, Matlab Simulation of
channel models and studying their characteristics,
CSMA/CA principles used for WLAN MAC, Details of MAC protocol, Medium reservation and
hidden nodes, MAC Frame Aggregation and QoS in WLAN, Roaming, Throughput calculation.
Network Entry Process in WLAN, Security Evolution, Power save concepts, Throughput and
performance of WLAN, Network tracking operations.
Sniffing WLAN Frames and analysis using open source tools, Inferring capabilities of APs and clients,
Analysing network entry steps and debugging connection problems, Analysing Data transmission and
debugging performance issues, Analysis of Roaming performance.
Text Books
1. Eldad Perahia and Robert Stacey, Next Generation wireless LANS 802.11n and 802.11ac, 2nd
edition, Cambridge University Press, 2013
2. Mathew Gast, 802.11 Wireless Networks: The Definitive Guide, 2nd Edition, OReily, 2009
Reference Books
1. Mathew Gast, 802.11n: A Survival Guide: Wi-Fi Above 100 Mbps, OReilly, 2012
2. Mathew Gast, 802.11ac: A Survival Guide: Wi-Fi at Gigabit and Beyond, OReilly, 2012
Course Outcomes:
CO1: To understand basics of WLAN systems including standardizing bodies, unlicensed
spectrum ranges, network types.
CO2: Appreciate physical layer challenges and solutions in 802.11 standards and be able to
simulate channel conditions
CO3: Be able to explain MAC layer steps in WLAN along with the motivation and impacts on
throughput and coexistence
CO4: Trace the steps followed in a typical WLAN network with a clear understanding of security,
power save, and network entry procedures
CO5: Analyze real-life protocol traces under various conditions and correlate with the concepts
learnt in the earlier sections.
33 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015