Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
demonstrate the nuances of management functions
analyze the framework of a business organization
adopt an empirical approach toward business situations
apply various Project Management techniques
implement roles of team players
CE402 PRESTRESSED CONCRETE STRUCTURES
Course objectives:
To learn the principles, materials, methods and systems of prestressing
To know the different types of losses and deflection of prestressed members
To learn the design of prestressed concrete beams for flexural, shear and tension and to
calculate ultimate flexural strength of beam
To learn the design of anchorage zones, composite beams, analysis and design of continuous
beam
To learn the design of water tanks
Course Content
Principles of prestressing - Materials of prestressing - Systems of prestressing - Loss of prestress -
Deflection of Prestressed Concrete members.
Slabs - Pre-tensioned and Post-tensioned beams - Design for flexure, bond and shear - IS code
provisions - Ultimate flexural and shear strength of prestressed concrete sections - Design of end
anchorage zones using IS code method.
Composite beams - Analysis and design.Partial prestressing - non-prestressed reinforcements.
Analysis of Continuous beams - Cable layout - Linear transformation - Concordant cables.
Design of compression members and tension members. Circular prestressing - Water tanks - Pipes -
Analysis and design - IS Codal provisions.
References
1. Lin. T.Y., Burns, N.H., Design of Prestressed Concrete Structures, John Wiley & Sons, 1982.
2. RajaGopalan N. Prestressed Concrete, Narosa Publishing House, New Delhi, 2002.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
design a prestressed concrete beam accounting for losses
design the anchorage zone for post tensioned members
design composite members
design continuous beams
design water tanks
36