Course Code : ECMI10
Course Title : SIGNALS AND SYSTEMS
Number of Credits 3
Prerequisites : NONE
(Course code)
Course Type : MI
Course Learning Objectives
 To make the students to understand the fundamental characteristics of signals and systems in
terms of both the time and transform domains
 Development of the mathematical skills to solve problems involving convolution, filtering,
modulation and sampling.
Course Content
Definition of Signals and Systems, Classification of Signals, Operations on signals, Singularity
functions and related functions. Analogy between vectors and signals - orthogonal signal space,
complete set of orthogonal functions, Parseval’s relations. Fourier series representation of continuous
time periodic signals -Trigonometric and Exponential Fourier series- Properties of Fourier series.
Fourier transform of aperiodic signals, standard signals and periodic signals - Properties of Fourier
transforms. Hilbert transform and its properties. Laplace transforms-RoC-properties. Inverse Laplace
transform.
Continuous-time Systems and its properties. Linear time invariant (LTI) system-Impulse response.
Convolution. Analysis of LTI System using Laplace and Fourier transforms.
Sampling and reconstruction of band limited signals. Low pass and band pass sampling theorems.
Aliasing. Anti-aliasing filter. Practical Sampling-aperture effect.
Discrete-time signals and systems. Discrete Fourier series. Z-transform and its properties. Analysis of
LSI systems using Z – transform.
Text Books
1. A.V.Oppenheim, A. Willsky, S. Hamid Nawab, “Signals and Systems (2/e)”, Pearson 200.
2. S.Haykin and B.VanVeen “Signals and Systems, Wiley, 1998.
Reference Books
1. M.Mandal and A.Asif, “Continuous and Discrete Time Signals and Systems, Cambridge,
2007.
2. D.C.Lay, “Linear Algebra and its Applications (2/e)”, Pearson, 200.
3. S.S.Soliman & M.D.Srinath, “Continuous and Discrete Signals and Systems”, Prentice- Hall,
1990.
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able to
CO1: Understand the mathematical description and representation of continuous-time and
discrete-time signals.
CO2: Analyze the spectral characteristics of continuous-time periodic and aperiodic signals using
Fourier analysis.
CO3: Analyse system properties based on impulse response and Fourier analysis
CO4: Convert a continuous time signal into discrete time signal and reconstruct the continuous
time signals back from its samples
CO5: Apply the Laplace transform and Z- transform respectively for the analyse of continuous-
time and discrete-time signals.
102 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015