CE458 Finite Element Method 3 0 0 3
CE458 FINITE ELEMENT METHOD
Course objectives:
To study the strain –displacement and linear constitutive relation
To understand the numerical techniques applied in FEM
Establishment of element stiffness and load vector
To study about the 2-D isoparametric concepts
To analyze the 2-D frame elements using FEM techniques
43
Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
Course Content
Differential equilibrium equations - strain displacement relation - linear constitutive relation - special
cases - Principle of stationary potential energy - application to finite element methods - Some numerical
techniques in finite element Analysis
Displacement models - convergence requirements. Natural coordinate systems - Shape function.
Interpolation function. Linear and quadratic elements - Lagrange & Serendipity elements. Strain
displacement matrix - element stiffness matrix and nodal load vector
Two dimensional isoparametric elements - Four noded quadrilateral elements - triangular elements.
Computation of stiffness matrix for isoparametric elements - numerical integration (Gauss quadrature)
Convergence criteria for isoparametric elements.
Assemblage of elements – Direct stiffness method. Special characteristics of stiffness matrix -
Boundary condition & reaction - Gauss elimination and LDLT decomposition. Basic steps in finite
element analysis.
Analysis of framed Structures: 2D – truss element - 2D - beam element. Analysis of plate bending-
displacement functions - plate bending Elements. Plane stress and plane strain analysis: Triangular
elements - Rectangular elements
References
1. Krishnamoorthy, C.S, Finite Element Analysis Theory & Programming, McGraw- Hill, 1995.
2. Desai C.S and Abel, J.F., Introduction to the finite element Method, Affiliated East west Press Pvt.
Ltd. New Delhi 2000.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
demonstrate the differential equilibrium equations and their relationship
apply numerical methods to FEM
demonstrate the displacement models and load vectors
compute the stiffness matrix for isoperimetric elements
analyze plane stress and plane strain problems