Course Code : ECHO16
Course Title : APPLIED PHOTONICS
Number of Credits 3
Prerequisites : NONE
(Course code)
Course Type : HO
Course learning Objectives
 To prepare the students understand the fundamental principles of light-matter interaction
and photonic band gap structures.
 To enable the students appreciate the diverse applications of fiberopticsensors.
Course content
Introduction to photonics; optical waveguide theory; Interference of light waves -numerical
techniques and simulation
Photonic waveguide components Optical Modulators and Switches Electro-optics - Acousto-optics -
Magneto-optics
Photonic Band gap Structures: Concept of photonic crystal; band gap and band structures in 1D, 2D
and 3D photonic crystal structures;
Photo-refractive materials, non-linear optics, recent trends in bio and nano-photonics
Optical fiber sensors - Sensing using optical fibers - Types:-Amplitude, Inter-ferometric,
Wavelength, Polarimetric – Distributed Sensors
Text Books
1. A. Ghatak and K. Thyagarajan, “Introduction to Fiber Optics”, Cambridge University
Press,2006.
2. PochiYeh and AmnonYariv Photonics,” Optical Electronics in Modern
Communications”,2007
Reference Books
1. F. T. S. Yu and S.Yin, “Fiber Optic Sensors”, Marcel Dekker, Inc2002
st
2. G. W. Hanson, “Fundamentals of Nanoelectronics “,Pearson Education, 1 edition,2008
3. B. Saleh and M. Teich, “Fundamentals of Photonics”, Wiley & Sons, 2007
4. Recent literature in Applied Photonics.
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able
CO1: understand the interference of light and optical waveguide theory.
CO2: understand the significance of photonic band gap structures and their application
CO3: analyze the different types of optical modulators.
CO4: compare the merits and demerits of different types of fiber optic sensors.
CO5: understand the application of nonlinear optics in bio and nano-photonics.
134 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015