Course Code : ECOE23
Course Title : INTERNET OF THINGS
Number of Credits 3
Prerequisites (Course : CSIR11, C/C++ and Python Programming skills
code)
Course Type : OE
Course Learning Objective
 To understand basics of an IOT System, IoT sensors, IoT hardware and communication
protocols, data storage, data analysis and use them for real time IoT enabled domains.
Introduction to IoT and IoT levels
Functional blocks of an IoT system - Basics of Physical and logical design of IoT - IoT enabled domains
- Difference between IoT, Embedded Systems and M2M - Industry 4.0 concepts
IoT sensors and hardware
Passive and active sensors - Different applications of sensors - Multi-sensors - Pre-processing - IoT
front-end hardware
Introduction to IoT protocols
Infrastructure - Communication/ Transport - Data Protocols: MQTT, CoAP, AMQP, Websocket, Node
IoT Cloud and data analytics
Collecting data from sensors - Data Ingress - Cloud storage - Data analytics for IoT - Software and
management tool for IoT - Dashboard design
IoT architectures with case studies
Business models for IoT - smart cities – agriculture – healthcare - industry.
Case studies/Mini projects for the real time IoT applications.
Text Books
1. Arshdeep Bahga, Vijay Madisetti, “Internet of Things – A hands-on approach”, Universities
Press, 2015.
Reference Books
1. Raj kamal, Internet of Things, Architecture and Design Principles, McGraw-Hill, 2017
2. Manoel Carlos Ramon, “Intel® Galileo and Intel® Galileo Gen 2: API Features and
Arduino Projects for Linux Programmers”, Apress, 2014.H.Gerez, “Algorithms for VLSI
Design Automation”, John Wiley, 1999.
3. Marco Schwartz, “Internet of Things with the Arduino Yun”, Packt Publishing, 2014.
COURSEOUTCOMES
Students are ableto
CO1: understand basic premise of an IOT System
CO2 : be familiar with the sensors available for IoT applications
CO3 : learn the front-end hardware platforms and communication protocols for IoT.
CO4 : understand cloud storage, data analysis and management
CO5 : usage for real time IoT enabled domains
92 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015