Course Code : ECMI26
Course Title : WIRELESS COMMUNICAITON
Number of Credits 3
Prerequisites : ECMI23
(Course code)
Course Type : MI
Course Learning Objective
 To get an understanding of mobile radio communication principles, types and to study the recent
trends adopted in cellular and wireless systems and standards.
Course Content
Introduction to Wireless Communication. Cellular concept. System design fundamentals. Coverage
and Capacity improvement in Cellular system. Technical Challenges.
Mobile Radio Propagation; Reflection, Diffraction, Fading. Multipath propagation. Statistical
characterization of multipath fading. Diversity Techniques.
Path loss prediction over hilly terrain. Practical link budget design using Path loss models. Design
parameters at base station. Antenna location, spacing, heights and configurations.
Multiple access techniques; FDMA, TDMA and CDMA. Spread spectrum. Power control. WCDMA.
CDMA network design. OFDM and MC-CDMA.
GSM.3G, 4G (LTE), NFC systems, WLAN technology. WLL. Hyper LAN. Ad hoc networks.
Bluetooth.
Text Books:
1. T.S.Rappaport, Wireless Communication Principles (2/e), Pearson, 2002.
2. A.F.Molisch, Wireless Communications, Wiley, 2005.
Reference Books:
1. P.MuthuChidambaraNathan, Wireless Communications, PHI, 2008.
2. W.C.Y.Lee, Mobile Communication Engineering. (2/e), McGraw- Hill, 1998.
3. A.Goldsmith, Wireless Communications, Cambridge University Press, 2005.
4. S.G.Glisic, Adaptive CDMA, Wiley, 2003.
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able
CO1: Apply the knowledge of basic communication systems and its principles.
CO2: Describe the cellular concept and analyze capacity improvement Techniques.
CO3: Mathematically analyze mobile radio propagation mechanisms.
CO4: Summarize diversity reception techniques.
CO5: Design Base Station (BS) parameters and analyze the antenna configurations.
118 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015