Course Code : ICPC15
Course Title : Digital Electronics
Type of Course : PC
Prerequisites : --
Contact Hours : 42 (3 credits)
Course Assessment Methods : Continuous Assessments, End Assessment
Course Learning Objectives (CLO)
The subject aims to provide the student with
CLO1 An understanding of number systems, codes and their conversions.
CLO2 The capability to reduce Boolean expression using K-map and tabular methods.
CLO3 The ability to design and analyze combinational and sequential logic circuits for
a given problem statement.
CLO4 An understanding of digital hardware, different types of logic families and their
characteristics
Course Content
Review of number systems and logic gates, Algebraic reductions, Binary codes -Weighted
and non- weighted, number complements, Binary arithmetic, Error detecting and error
correcting codes, SOP, POS Canonical logic forms, Karnaugh maps and Quine-McClusky
methods, Don’t care conditions, minimization of multiple output functions.
Synthesis of combinational functions: Arithmetic Circuits-Adder/ Subtractor, carry look-ahead
adder, signed number addition and subtraction, BCD adders. IC adders. Multiplexers,
implementation of combinational functions using multiplexers, de-multiplexers, decoders,
code converters, Digital ICs for combinational logic circuits.
Sequential Logic: Basic latch circuit, Debouncing of a switch, Flip-Flops: truth table and
excitation table, conversion of Flip-flops, integrated circuit flip-flops. Race in sequential
circuits, Shift Registers, Counters - Synchronous, Asynchronous, Up-Down, Design of
counters.
Analysis of clocked sequential circuits, Design with state equations, Moore and Mealy graphs,
State reduction and assignment, Sequence detection, Hazards. Complexity and propagation
delay analysis of circuits. Programmable logic devices, Design using Programmable Logic
Devices (PLA, PAL, CPLD and FPGA).
Digital Hardware: Logic levels, Realization of logic gates, different logic families (TTL, ECL,
CMOS, HC, HCT, ACT and HSCMOS), Logic levels, voltages and currents, fan-in, fan-out,
speed, power dissipation. Comparison of logic families, interfacing between different families.
References
1. M. Morris Mano, Charles Kime, Tom Martin, Logic and Computer Design
Fundamentals, Pearson, 5th Edition, 2016
2. J.P. Uyemura, A First Course in Digital Systems Design: An Integrated Approach,
Nelson Engineering, 1999
3. W. H. Gothmann, Digital Electronics - An Introduction to Theory and Practice,
Prentice Hall of India, 2nd Edition, 2000
4. J.M. Rabaey, Digital Integrated Circuits: A Design Perspective, Prentice Hall of
India, 2nd Edition, 2003
5. N.H.E. Weste, and K. Eshraghian, Principles of CMOS VLSI Design: A Systems
Perspective, Pearson Education Inc., (Asia), 3rd Edition, 2005
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 50 | Pa ge
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli
6. S. Brown and Z Vranesic, Fundamentals of Logic Design with VHDL Design, Tata
McGraw- Hill, 2002
7. V. P. Nelson, H.T. Nagle, E.D. Caroll and J.D. Irwin, Digital Logic Circuit Analysis
and Design, Prentice Hall International, 1995
8. Anil K Maini, Digital Electronics: Principles and Integrated Circuits , Wiley, 2019
9. Thomas L. Floyd, Digital Fundamentals, 11th Edition, Pearson, 2015
10. Ronald J. Tocci, Widmer Neal, Moss Greg, Digital Systems principles and
Applications,12th Edition, Prentice Hall, 2010
Course Outcomes (CO)
On completion of this course, the students will be able to,
CO1 Understand various number systems, conversions and simplify the logical
expressions using Boolean functions.
CO2 Design and develop arithmetic and other special functions using combinational
logic circuits and PLDs.
CO3 Design and develop synchronous and asynchronous for the given problem
statement.
CO4 Understand how logic gates are built from the fundamental semiconductor
electronics and be able to select logic ICs from different families based on
requirement.
Course Outcome and Programme Outcome Mapping
0 1 2 1 2 3
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 1 1 O O O
O O O O O O O O O O O O S S S
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
CO1 2 3 2 3 2 2 - - - - - - 3 3 -
CO2 2 3 2 2 2 3 - - - - - - 3 3 -
CO3 3 3 3 3 2 2 - - - - - - 3 3 -
CO4 2 3 2 3 3 2 - - - - - - 3 3 -
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 51 | Pa ge
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli