Course Code : ECOE84
Course Title : Microwave Circuits
Number of Credits : 3
Course Type : OE
COURSE OBJECTIVE
• To make the students familiarize with ABCD parameters, S parameters, Applications of planar
transmission lines in the practical microwave circuits, Design and layout of all Microwave Integrated
Circuit Design components and then systems.
COURSE CONTENT
Introduction and application of microwave circuits - Two-port network characterization. ABCD
parameters, Conversion of S matrix in terms of ABCD matrix. Scattering matrix representation of
microwave components. Review of Smith chart and its application- Impedance matching using
Lumped and Distributed approach.
Microwave Passive circuit design: Characteristics, properties, design parameters and applications-
Design and realization of MIC Power dividers. 3 dB hybrid design. Directional Coupler design-
Hybrid ring design.
Microwave filter design- Filter design by insertion loss method –Richards and Kuroda transformation.
K inverter, J inverter. Resonator filters. Realization using microstrip lines and strip lines.
Microwave amplifier design- Power gain equations -Stability considerations. Maximum gain design,
Design for specific gain -Low Noise Amplifier Design. High power design.
Microwave oscillator design. One – port and two – port negative resistance oscillators and oscillator
design
Text Books:
1. Reinhold Ludwig, RF circuit design, 2nd edition, Prentice Hall 2014, ISBN: 978-0131471375
2. David. M. Pozar, Microwave engineering, 4th edition, John Wiley, 2011, ISBN: 978-
0470631553.
3. Devendra K. Misra, “Radio-Frequency and microwave communication circuits analysis
and design”, 2nd edition, University of Wisconsin-Mulwaukee, A John Wiley & Sons Publication
Reference Books:
1. B. Bhat, S. K Koul, “Stripline like transmission lines for Microwave Integrated Circuits”,
New Age International Pvt. Ltd Publishers, 2007.
2. I.J.Bahl & P.Bhartia, “Microwave Solid state Circuit Design (2/e)”, Wiley, 2003.
3. Matthew M. Radmanesh, Radio Frequency and Microwave Electronics Illustrated, Prentice
Hall, 2012
4. S.Y.Liao, “Microwave Circuit Analysis and Amplifier Design”, Prentice-Hall, 1986.
5. G. Mathaei, L young, E.M.T. Jones, “Microwave filters, Impedance-Matching networks and
Coupling structures”, Artech House Books.
COURSE OUTCOMES
Students are able to
CO1: Understand the basics of Scattering matrix and two port characterization and importance of
matching circuits.
CO2: Analyze the working principles of couplers, power dividers etc. and their design.
CO3: Design the different types of MIC filters and their implementation.
CO4: Understand the complexities of microwave amplifier design and its stability features.
CO5: Analyze and appreciate the design principles of microwave oscillators.
101 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015