Course Code : ICPE56
Course Title : Nuclear Instrumentation
Type of Course : PE
Prerequisites : ICPC14, ICPC17
Contact Hours : 42 (3 credits)
Course Assessment : Continuous Assessment, End Assessment
Methods
Course Learning Objectives (CLO)
CLO1 To introduce the basic concept of radioactivity, properties of alpha, beta and gamma
rays
CLO2 To study various radiation detectors, detector classification
CLO3 To study the electronics and counting systems
CLO4 To study applications of nuclear instrumentation in medicines, Industry and in
Agriculture
Course Content
Radioactivity: General properties of Nucleus, Radioactivity, Nature of Nuclear Radiation's,
Properties of Alpha, Beta and Gamma rays, Natural and artificial radio-activity. Radioactivity
Laws, Half-life period, radioactive series, Isotopes and Isobars, Various effects-
photoelectric, Compton scattering and pair production, stopping power and range of charged
nuclear particles
Radiation Detectors: Techniques for radiation detection, Detectors for Alpha, beta and
gamma rays, Detector classification, Gas filled detectors - volt ampere characteristics,
Ionization chamber, Proportional counter, Geiger Muller counter, designing features,
Scintillation detectors, Photomultiplier tube, dark currents, pulse resolving power, efficiency
of detection, Solid state detectors (Lithium ion drifted – Si-Li, Ge-Li, Diffused junction, surface
barrier detectors)
Electronics and Counting systems: Pre-amp, shaping amplifiers, Discriminators, Scalars and
count rate meters, Pulse shaping, peak stretchers, photon counting system block diagram,
single channel analyser SCA (pulse height analyser - PHA), Coincidence detection
Nuclear Spectroscopy systems: Factors influencing resolution of gamma energy spectrum,
Energy resolution in radiation detectors, Multichannel analysers (MCA), Role of Nuclear
ADC's – performance parameters.
Radiation Monitors and Application in Medicines: Radiation uptake studies – block diagram
and design features. Gamma camera – design, block diagram, medical usage. Nuclear
instrumentation for health care, Radiation Personnel Health Monitors like neutron monitors,
Gamma Monitors, Tritium monitors, Iodine monitors and PARA (particulate activity radiation
alarms).
Applications in Industry: Basic Nuclear Instrumentation system – block diagram, Personal
monitors like Thermo Luminescence Detectors (TLD). Dosimeters, Tele-detectors. Nuclear
Instrumentation for power reactor. Nuclear Instrumentation for Toxic fluid tank level
measurement, weighing, thickness gauges, Agriculture applications like food irradiation,
Underground Piping Leak detection, water content measurement etc.
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 181 | P age
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli
References
1. G.F. Knoll, Radiation Detection and Measurement, 2nd Edition, John Wiley and
Sons, 1998.
2. P.W. Nicholson, Nuclear Electronics, John Wiley, 1998.
3. S.S. Kapoor and V.S. Ramamurthy, Nuclear Radiation Detectors, Wiley Easter
Limited, 1986.
4. Gaur and Gupta, Engineering Physics, Dhanpat Rai and Sons, 2001.
5. Irvin Kaplan, Nuclear Physics , Narosa, 1987.
6. M.N. Avdhamule and P.G. Kshirsagar, Engineering Physics, S. Chand and Co., 2001.
7. R.M. Singru, Introduction to Experimental Nuclear Physics, Wiley Eastern Pvt. Ltd.,
1974.
8. B.R. Bairi, Balvinder Singh, N.C. Rathod, P.V. Narurkar , Hand Book of Nuclear
Medical Instruments, TMH Publishing New Delhi, 1974.
Course Outcomes (CO)
On completion of this course, the students will be able to,
CO1 The students get well versed with construction and working of various radiation
detectors.
CO2 Students also get thorough knowledge of electronics and counting systems used
in nuclear instrumentation
CO3 Understand the radiation monitors in medical applications
CO4 Students get detailed information about applications of nuclear instrumentation
in medicine, industry etc.
Course Outcome and Programme Outcome Mapping
0 1 2 1 2 3
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 1 1 O O O
O O O O O O O O O O O O S S S
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
CO1 3 3 3 3 3 - - - 2 2 2 3 3 3 -
CO2 3 3 3 3 3 - - - 2 2 2 3 3 3 -
CO3 3 3 3 3 3 - - - 2 2 2 3 3 3 -
CO4 2 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 3 3 3 2 2 2 1
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 182 | P age
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli