Course Code : ECHO11
Course Title : SPECTRAL ANALYSIS OF SIGNALS
Number of Credits 3
Prerequisites : ECPC15
(Course code)
Course Type : HO
Course learning Objective
 To give an exhaustive survey of methods available for power spectrum estimation.
Course content
Periodogram and correlogram. Blackman – Tukey, Bartlett, Welch and Daniel methods. Window
design considerations.
Parametric methods for rational spectra. Covariance structure of ARMA processes. AR, MA and
ARMA signals. Multivariate ARMA signals.
Parametric methods for line spectra. Models of sinusoidal signals in noise. Nonlinear least squares,
high order Yule-Walker, min-norm, Pisarenko, MUSIC and ESPRIT methods.
Filter bank methods. Filter-bank interpretation of the periodogram. Refined filter-bank and Capon
methods.
Spatial methods. Array model. Nonparametric methods; beam forming and Capon method. Parametric
methods; nonlinear least squares, Yule-Walker, min-norm, Pisarenko, MUSIC and ESPRIT methods.
Text Books
1. P.Stoica & R.Moses, “Spectral Analysis of signals”, Pearson, 2005.
2. Marple, “Introduction to Spectral Analysis”, Prentice Hall.
Reference Books
1. S.M.Key, “Fundamentals of Statistical Signal Processing”, Prentice Hall PTR, 1998.
2. Recent literature in Spectral Analysis of Signals.
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able
CO1: derive and analyse the statistical properties of the conventional spectral estimators, namely
the periodogram, averaged & modified periodogram and Blackman-Tukey methods.
CO2: formulate modern, parametric, spectral estimators based upon autoregressive (AR), moving
average (MA), and autoregresive moving average (ARMA) models, and detail their statistical
properties. Describe the consequence of the term resolution as applied to a spectral estimator.
CO3: define techniques for calculating moments in spectral and temporal domains; Analyze filter
bank method, capon methods for spectrum estimation.
CO4: demonstrate knowledge and understanding of the principles of parametric and non-
parametric array processing algorithms.
CO5: select an appropriate array processing algorithms for frequency estimation and sonar, radar
applications.
129 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015