Course Code : ECHO28
Course Title : PHYSICAL DESIGN AUTOMATION
Number of Credits 3
Prerequisites : NONE
(Course code)
Course Type : HO
Course learning Objectives
 Understand the concepts of Physical Design Process such as partitioning, Floor planning,
Placement and Routing.
 Discuss the concepts of design optimization algorithms and their application to physical design
automation.
 Understand the concepts of simulation and synthesis in VLSI Design Automation
 Formulate CAD design problems using algorithmic methods
Course content
VLSI design automation tools- algorithms and system design. Structural and logic design. Transistor
level design. Layout design. Verification methods. Design management tools.
Layout compaction, placement and routing. Design rules, symbolic layout. Applications of
compaction. Formulation methods. Algorithms for constrained graph compaction. Circuit
representation. Wire length estimation. Placement algorithms. Partitioning algorithms.
Floor planning and routing- floor planning concepts. Shape functions and floor planning sizing. Local
routing. Area routing. Channel routing, global routing and its algorithms.
Simulation and logic synthesis- gate level and switch level modeling and simulation. Introduction to
combinational logic synthesis. ROBDD principles, implementation, construction and manipulation.
Two level logic synthesis.
High-level synthesis- hardware model for high level synthesis. Internal representation of input
algorithms. Allocation, assignment and scheduling. Scheduling algorithms. Aspects of assignment.
High level transformations.
Text Books
1. S.H. Gerez, “Algorithms for VLSI Design Automation”, JohnWiley, 1998.
2. N.A.Sherwani, “Algorithms for VLSI Physical Design Automation”, (3/e),Kluwer, 1999.
Reference Books
1. S.M. Sait, H. Youssef, “VLSI Physical Design Automation”, World scientific,1999.
2. M.Sarrafzadeh, “Introduction to VLSI Physical Design”, McGraw Hill (IE),1996.
3. Recent literature in Physical Design Automation.
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able
CO1: know how to place the blocks and how to partition the blocks while for designing the
layout for IC.
CO2: solve the performance issues in circuit layout.
CO3: analyze physical design problems and Employ appropriate automation algorithms for
partitioning, floor planning, placement and routing
CO4: decompose large mapping problem into pieces, including logic optimization with
partitioning, placement and routing
CO5: analyze circuits using both analytical and CAD tools
147 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015