Course Code : ICPC24
Course Title : Digital Signal Processing
Type of Course : PE
Prerequisites : ICPC13
Contact Hours : 42 (3 credits)
Course Assessment Methods : Continuous Assessment, End Assessment
Course Learning Objectives (CLO)
CLO1 To provide higher level of understanding of discrete-time and digital signal in time
and frequency domains.
CLO2 To provide knowledge to analyze linear systems with difference equations
CLO3 design and implement different structures of FIR and IIR filters.
CLO4 To introduce about DSP processors and FFT processors.
Course Content
Signal Processing Fundamentals: Discrete-time and digital signals, A/D, D/A conversion and
Nyquist rate, Frequency aliasing due to sampling, Need for anti-aliasing filters. Discrete Time
Fourier transform and frequency spectra, Spectral computation, Computational complexity of
the DFT and the FFT, Algorithmic development and computational advantages of the FFT,
Inverse FFT, Implementation of the FFT, Correlation of discrete-time signals.
Discrete-time systems, Difference equations and the Z-transform, Analysis of discrete-time
LTIL systems, Stability and Jury’s test.
FIR Filters: Ideal digital filters, Realizability and filter specifications, Classification of linear
phase FIR filters, Design using direct truncation, window methods and frequency sampling,
Least-squares optimal FIR filters, Minimax optimal FIR filters, Design of digital differentiators
and Hilbert transformers, comparison of design methods.
IIR Filters: Design of analog prototype filters, Analog frequency transformations, Impulse
invariance method and digital frequency transformations, Bilinear transformation, Analog
prototype to digital transformations, Difficulties in direct IIR filter design, Comparisons with FIR
filters.
Filter Realization: Structures for FIR filters, Structures for IIR filters, State-space analysis and
filter structures, fixed point and floating-point representation of numbers, Errors resulting from
rounding and truncating, Quantization effects of filter coefficients, Round-off effects of digital
filters.
DSP Processors: Computer architectures for signal processing – Harvard architecture and
pipelining, General purpose digital signal processors, Selection of DSPs, Implementation of
DSP algorithms on a general purpose DSP, Special purpose hardware – hardware digital
filters and hardware FFT processors, Evaluation boards for real-time DSP.
References
1. Chen, C.T., Digital Signal Processing: Spectral Computation and Filter Design, Oxford
Univ. Press, 2001
2. Proakis, J.G., Manolakis, D.G., Digital Signal Processing: Principles, Algorithms, and
Applications, Prentice Hall of India, 4th Edition, 2007
3. Ifeachor, E.C., and Jervis, B.W., Digital Signal Processing: A Practical Approach,
Pearson Education Asia, 2nd Edition, 2009
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 70 | Pa ge
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli
4. McClellan, J.H., Schafer, R.W., and Yoder, M.A., DSP First: A Multimedia Approach,
Prentice Hall Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2nd Edition, 2003
5. Mitra, S.K., Digital Signal Processing: A Computer-Based Approach, McGraw Hill, NY,
4th Edition, 2011
6. Embree, P.M., and Danieli, D., C++ Algorithms for Digital Signal Processing, Prentice
Hall Upper Saddle River, NJ, 2nd Edition, 1999
Course Outcomes (CO)
On completion of this course, the students will be able to,
CO1 Analyze the signals in both time and frequency domain
CO2 Design FIR and IIR filters for signal pre-processing
CO3 Implement and realize the filters using different structures.
CO4 Explain the selection of DSP processor for signal processing applications.
Course Outcome and Programme Outcome Mapping
0 1 2 1 2 3
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 1 1 O O O
O O O O O O O O O O O O S S S
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
CO1 3 2 3 3 3 1 2 - 2 1 2 3 3 3 -
CO2 3 3 3 3 3 1 3 - 2 2 3 3 3 3 -
CO3 3 3 3 3 3 2 3 - 2 2 3 3 3 3 -
CO4 3 3 3 3 3 2 3 1 3 3 3 3 3 3 1
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 71 | Pa ge
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli