Course Code : ECPE14
Course Title : EMBEDDED SYSTEMS
Number of Credits 3
Prerequisites : NONE
(Course code)
Course Type : PE
Course Learning Objectives
 To make the students to understand and program embedded systems using modern embedded
processors.
 This course describes example embedded platforms, interfaces, peripherals, processors and
operating systems associated with embedded systems, a comprehensive view of the software
frame work being developed around embedded SOCs.
Course Content
Introduction to Embedded Computing: Characteristics of Embedding Computing Applications,
Concept of Real time Systems, Challenges in Embedded System Design, Design Process. Embedded
System Architecture: Instruction Set Architecture, CISC and RISC instruction set architecture, Basic
Embedded Processor/Microcontroller Architecture (ATOM processor, Introduction to Tiva family
etc.)
Designing Embedded Computing Platform: Bus Protocols, Bus Organization, Memory Devices and
their Characteristics, Memory mapped I/O, I/O Devices, I/O mapped I/O, Timers and Counters,
Watchdog Timers, Interrupt Controllers, Interrupt programming, GPIO control, Sensors, Actuators,
A/D and D/A Converters, Need of low power for embedded systems, Mixed Signals Processing.
Programming Embedded Systems: Basic Features of an Operating System, Kernel Features, Real-time
Kernels, Processes and Threads, Context Switching, Scheduling, Shared Memory Communication,
Message-Based Communication, Real-time Memory Management, Dynamic Allocation, Device
Drivers, Real-time Transactions and Files, Real-time OS (VxWorks, RT-Linux, Psos).
Network Based Embedded Applications: Embedded Networking Fundamentals, Layers and Protocols,
Distributed Embedded Architectures, Internet-Enabled Systems, IoT overview and architecture,
Interfacing Protocols (like UART, SPI, I2C, GPIB, FIREWIRE, USB,). Various wireless protocols
and its applications: NFC, Zig Bee, Bluetooth, Bluetooth Low Energy, Wi-Fi. CAN. Overview of
wireless sensor networks and design examples
Case studies: Programming in Embedded C, Embedded system design using Arduino, ATOM
processors, Galileo and Tiva based embedded system applications.
Text Books
1. Wayne Wolf, “Computers as Components- Principles of Embedded Computing System
Design”, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, Second edition, 2008.
2. Barry Crowley, “Modern Embedded Computing”, Morgan Kaufmann Publishers, 2012.
Reference Books
1. Lyla B. Das, “Embedded Systems –An Integrated Approach”, Pearson, 2013.
2. Marwedel Peter, “Embedded System Design, Kluwer Publications, 2004.
3. C.M. Krishna, Kang G. Shin, “Real time systems”, Mc- Graw Hill, 2010
4. Recent literature in Embedded Systems.
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able to
CO1: get an insight into the overall landscape and characteristics of embedded systems.
CO2: facilitate a comprehensive understanding of the overall platform architecture of
modern embedded computing systems.
CO3: develop application software for embedded systems using the RTOS functions.
CO4: enable network connectivity of the embedded systems via a combination of wired
and wireless network interfaces.
CO5: design and program embedded systems based on their applications.
36 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015