Course Code : ECOE76
Course Title : Computer Vision
Number of Credits : 3
Prerequisites : NONE
(Course code)
Course Type : OE
COURSE OBJECTIVE
 The focus of this course is the understanding of algorithms and techniques used in computer
vision.
 Provide pointers into the literature and exercise a project based on a literature search and one
or more research papers.
 Practice software implementation of different concepts and techniques covered in the course.
 Utilize programming and scientific tools for relevant software implementation.
COURSE CONTENT
Introduction: overview of computer vision, related areas, and applications; overview of software tools;
overview of course objectives.; introduction to OpenCV. Image formation and representation: imaging
geometry, radiometry, digitization, cameras and projections, rigid and affine transformations,
Filtering: convolution, smoothing, differencing, and scale space
Feature detection: edge detection, corner detection, line and curve detection, active contours, SIFT
and HOG descriptors, shape context descriptors, Model fitting: Hough transform, line fitting, ellipse
and conic sections fitting, algebraic and Euclidean distance measures.
Camera calibration: camera models; intrinsic and extrinsic parameters; radial lens distortion; direct
parameter calibration; camera parameters from projection matrices; orthographic, weak perspective,
affine, and perspective camera models.
Motion analysis: the motion field of rigid objects; motion parallax; optical flow, the image brightness
constancy equation, affine flow; differential techniques; feature-based techniques; regularization and
robust estimation; motion segmentation through EM, Motion tracking: statistical filtering; iterated
estimation; observability and linear systems; the Kalman filter; the extended Kalman filter
Object recognition and shape representation: alignment, appearance-based methods, invariants, image
Eigen spaces, data-based techniques.
Text Books
4. Computer Vision: Algorithms and Applications, R. Szeliski, Springer, 2011.
5. Computer Vision: A Modern Approach, D. Forsyth and J. Ponce, Prentice Hall, 2nd ed., 2011.
6. Introductory techniques for 3D computer vision, E. Trucco and A. Verri, Prentice Hall, 1998.
COURSE OUTCOMES
Students are able
CO1: To understand the fundamental problems of computer vision.
CO2: To learn techniques, mathematical concepts and algorithms used in computer
vision to facilitate further study in this area.
CO3: To get an idea regarding the camera calibration and its importance.
CO4: To study different kinds of motion estimation methodologies and its applications.
CO5: To understand the basic concepts of object and shape recognition techniques
93 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015