Course Code : ECPE50
Course Title : Photonic Integrated Circuits
Number of Credits : 3
Course Type : Elective
COURSE LEARNING OBJECTIVES
 The photonic integrated circuits course will introduce the basics of integrated optical
waveguides used in optical communication applications.
 To introduce the concept reconfigurable architecture design in Photonic circuits
 To understand and realize Application-Specific Photonic Integrated Circuits and devices
for Classical Applications
 This course also covers materials and fabrication technology for optical integrated circuits.
COURSE CONTENT
Brief history of optical communication, Advantages of integrated optics configuration, Guided TE
and TM Modes of Symmetric and anti-symmetric planar waveguides: Step-index and graded-
index waveguides. Strip and channel waveguides, Beam propagation method.
Directional couplers, Applications as power splitters, Y-junction, optical switch; modulators,
filters, A/D converters, Mode splitters, Mach-Zehnder interferometer based devices.
Acousto-optic waveguide devices. Arrayed waveguide devices, Nano-photonic-devices:
Metal/dielectric plasmonic waveguides, Surface Plasmon modes, applications in waveguide
polarizers.
Materials. Glass, lithium niobate, silicon, compound semiconductors. Fabrication of integrated
optical waveguides and devices. Lithography, deposition.
Waveguide characterisation, prism coupling, grating and tapered couplers, Nonlinear effects in
integrated optical waveguides, Types and Applications.
Text Books
1. H Nishihara, M Haruna and T Suhara, Optical Integrated Circuits; McGraw-Hill
Book Company, New York, 1989.
2. C. R. Pollock and M Lipson, Integrated photonics, Kluwer Pub, 2003.
3. José Capmany and Daniel Pérez, Photonic Integrated Circuits, Oxford Univversity Press, 2020
Reference Books
1. A Ghatak and K Thyagarajan, Optical Electronics, Cambridge University Press, 1989.
2. T. Tamir, Guided wave opto-electronics, Springer Verilag, 1990
3. K. Okamota, Fundamentals of Optical waveguides, Academic Press, 2006.
4. T. Tamir, Integrated Optics, Springer Verlag, New York, 1982.
5. Recent journals and conference proceedings.
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able
CO1: Summarize the fundamental concept of optical waveguides.
CO2: Construct the different types of optical waveguides.
CO3: Construct the couplers, modulators and devices for communication applications
CO4: Summarize fabrication technologies for design of optical waveguides
CO5: Describe the various nonlinear effects in integrated optical waveguides.
73 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015