CE462 Advanced Surveying Techniques 3 0 0 3
CE462 ADVANCED SURVEYING TECHNIQUES
Course Objectives:
To know about significance of advanced surveying in field measurements in terms of utility and
precision of data collection
To learn on the principles of Electronic distance measurements, Total station and their
accuracy
To get introduced to the concept of photogrammetry in preliminary identification and map
making
To know in detail the concept of remote sensing in identification of land features from space
and to get introduced to different data acquisition techniques like LIDAR, RADAR
To get introduced to the field of geodesy, coordinate systems, Map projections, GPS, its
working principles, data collection, data processing and analysis
Course Content
Electromagnetic distance measurement (EDM) – Principle of EDM Carrier waves – Types of EDM
instruments – Distomat – Total Station – Principle – procedure & surveying using Total Station –
precise leveling - micro-optic theodolite.
Photogrammetry – Terrestrial and Aerial Photogrammetry – Horizontal position of a point from
photographic measurement – elevation of a point – Determination of focal length of camera - Geometry
and scale of vertical photographs – Ground co-ordinates from vertical photographs - Relief
displacement – Planimetric mapping from vertical photos – Stereoscopy– Photo interpretation.
Remote sensing – concepts – Idealized remote sensing system – characteristics – Types of remote
sensing system – Remote sensing from space – Data interpretation – application of remote sensing –
LIDAR – RADAR - SONAR.
Geodesy – Figure of earth – Classification – Earth surface - Geodetic reference surfaces - Coordinate
systems – Geodetic datums and elements – Map – Scale of map – projection – UTM – Map projection
of India – Space Geodesy – VLBI – SLR - LLR.
GPS Basics – system overview – working principle of GPS – Satellite ranging –calculating position –
Ranging errors and its correction – GPS surveying Methods – static, Rapid static, DGPS and Kinematic
methods – Real time and post processing DGPS – visibility diagram – GAGAN.
References
1. Duggal, S.K. Surveying Vol. II, Tata McGraw Hill, 2004.
2. Punmia, B.C. Surveying Vol.III, Standard Publishers, 2005.
47
Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
3. Arora, K. R. Surveying Vol. III, Standard Book House, 1996.
4. Satheesh Gopi. Advanced Surveying, Pearson Education, 2007.
5. Satheesh Gopi. The Global Positioning System and Surveying using GPS, Tata McGraw, 2005.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
apply advanced surveying techniques in different fields of civil engineering
select the advanced surveying technique which is best suited for a work
apply total station and EDM in distance measurement and traversing
demonstrate the principles of the earth surface, its projections and different coordinates
involved in map making
apply GPS in transportation engineering, structural engineering and land use planning