Course Code : ECHO26
Course Title : VLSI DIGITAL SIGNAL PROCESSING SYSTEMS
Number of Credits 3
Prerequisites : ECPC15 &ECPE31
(Course code)
Course Type : HO
Course learning Objectives
 To enable students to design VLSI systems with high speed and low power.
 To encourage students to develop a working knowledge of the central ideas of implementation
of DSP algorithm with optimized hardware.
Course content
An overview of DSP concepts, Representations of DSP algorithms. Systolic Architecture Design: FIR
Systolic Array, Matrix-Matrix Multiplication, 2D Systolic Array Design. Digital Lattice Filter
Structures: Schur Algorithm, Derivation of One-Multiplier Lattice Filter, Normalized Lattice Filter,
Pipelining of Lattice Filter.
Scaling and Round off Noise - State variable description of digital filters, Scaling and Round off Noise
computation, Round off Noise in Pipelined IIR Filters, Round off Noise Computation using state
variable description, Slow-down, Retiming and Pipelining.
Bit level arithmetic Architectures- parallel multipliers, interleaved floor-plan and bit-plane-based
digital filters, Bit serial multipliers, Bit serial filter design and implementation, Canonic signed digit
arithmetic, Distributed arithmetic.
Redundant arithmetic -Redundant number representations, carry free radix-2 addition and subtraction,
Hybrid radix-4 addition, Radix-2 hybrid redundant multiplication architectures, data format
conversion, Redundant to Non redundant converter.
Numerical Strength Reduction – Sub expression Elimination, Multiple Constant Multiplication, Sub
expression sharing in Digital Filters, Additive and Multiplicative Number Splitting.
Text Book
1. K.K.Parhi, “VLSI Digital Signal Processing Systems”, John-Wiley, 2007
Reference Book
1. U. Meyer -Baese, Digital Signal Processing with FPGAs, Springer, 2004
2. Recent literature in VLSI Digital Signal Processing Systems.
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able
CO1: Acquire the knowledge of round off noise computation and numerical strength reduction.
CO2: Ability to design Bit level and redundant arithmetic Architectures.
145 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015