Course Code : ECPE35
Course Title : SATELLITE COMMUNICATION
Number of Credits 3
Prerequisites : ECPC18
(Course code)
Course Type : PE
Course learning Objectives
 To introduce and to make understand the radio propagation channel for Earth station to
satellite & satellite to Earth station.
 To introduce various aspects in the design of communication & multiple access systems for
satellite communication.
 To introduce the concept of launchers and design of Earth station and satellite link.
Course content
Elements of orbital mechanics. Equations of motion. Tracking and orbit determination. Orbital
correction/control. Satellite launch systems. Multistage rocket launchers and their performance.
Elements of communication satellite design. Spacecraft subsystems. Reliability considerations.
Spacecraft integration.
Multiple access techniques. FDMA, TDMA, CDMA. Random access techniques. Satellite on-board
processing.
Satellite Link Design: Performance requirement and standards. Laser Satellite Communication: Link
analysis, optical satellite link transmitter, optical satellite link receiver, satellite beam acquisition,
tracking & positioning, deep space optical communication link.
Earth station design. Configurations. Antenna and tracking systems. Satellite broadcasting. GPS.
VSAT.
Text Books
1. D. Roddy, “Satellite Communication (4/e)”, McGraw-Hill, 2009.
2. T. Pratt & C. W. Bostain, “Satellite Communication”, Wiley 2000.
Reference Books
1. Bruce R. Elbert, ‘The Satellite Communication Applications’ Hand Book, Artech House
Bostan London, 1997.
2. B. N. Agrawal, “Design of Geo synchronous Spacecraft”, Prentice-Hall, 1986.
3. A.K. Maini, V. Agrawal, “Satellite Communications”, Wiley India Pvt Ltd, 1999.
4. Recent literature in Satellite Communication.
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able
CO1: learn the dynamics of the satellite.
CO2: learn the spacecraft and subsystems.
CO3: understand how analog and digital technologies are used for satellite communication
networks.
CO4: understand the radio frequency channel from Earth station to Satellite.
CO5: study the design of Earth station and tracking of the satellites.
57 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015