Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
estimate bearing capacity using IS code methods
design proper foundations for any kind of shallow foundation system
estimate pile and pile group capacity for any kind of soil including group efficiency and
negative friction
CE210 ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING - I
Course objectives:
To make the students conversant with sources and its demand of water
To understand the basic characteristics of water and its determination
To expose the students to understand the design of water supply lines
To provide adequate knowledge about the water treatment processes and its design
To have adequate knowledge on operation and maintenance of water supply
Course Content
Physical, chemical and biological characteristics of water - water analysis- IS and WHO standards-
Requirements of water supply - Types of demand and their contribution - rate of consumption -
Forecasting the population- variation in demand pattern.
Sources of water - quantitative and qualitative studies. Intakes - Channels and pipes for conveying
water -- Pipes- hydraulic design of pressure pipe- Materials - laying- joining- testing - pipe
appurtenances- Pumps and pumping stations
Treatment plants - process of treatments - mixing, aeration, sedimentation, coagulation, filtration,
disinfection, softening - advanced water treatment. Distribution systems - analysis of distribution
networks
Operation and maintenance of water supply to buildings - Rural water supply - Protected water supply -
Saline water intrusion.
Note: Assignments include the drawings of various water treatment units.
References
1. Manual on Water supply and Treatment - CPHEEO, 1999
2. Birdie, G.S. and Birdie, Water Supply and Sanitary Engineering, Dhanpat Rai & Sons, 1992.
3. Duggal, K.N. Elements of Environmental Engineering, S.Chand & Co, 2002.
4. Punmia B.C, Ashok Jain & Arun Jain, Water Supply Engineering, Laxmi Publications, Pvt. Ltd.,
New Delhi, 2004.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
identify the source of water and water demand
apply the water treatment concept and methods
apply water distribution processes and operation and maintenance of water supply
prepare basic process designs of water and wastewater treatment plants collect, reduce,
analyze, and evaluate basic water quality data
16