Course Code : ICOE21
Course Title : Product Design and Development (Theory
and Practice)
Type of Course : Open Elective (OE)
Prerequisites : --
Contact Hours : 42 (3 credits)
Course Assessment Methods : Continuous Assessments, Assignments, Final
Assessment
Course Learning Objectives (CLO)
CLO1 The aim of this course is to inculcate into the student the spirit of innovation and
entrepreneurship. This is achieved in this course by making the students to develop
a marketable product on their own as a group. At the end of this semester course,
the students will learn how to know the needs of the society and solve the musing
the technical knowledge at their disposal.
CLO2 The students will learn some of the general concepts needed for new product
development and simultaneously learn how to interact with society outside the
campus to learn about its needs. They also learn about how to get prototypes
fabricated outside the campus.
CLO3 The students will fabricate an alpha prototype and test it for its conformity to the
design specifications at the beginning of the next academic session
CLO4 After demonstration of the alpha prototype, they proceed to fabricate a beta
prototype that is acceptable in the market-place
Course Content
Introduction to product design – Product planning – Identifying customer needs – Project
selection
– Concept generation–Concept testing–Concept selection . Product specification–Product
architecture
– Industrial design – Robust design. Product development economics – Design for
manufacturing – Supply chain design – Intellectual property – Design for environment.
PRACTICAL WORK
Interaction with public outside the campus- identifying customer needs- product selection
based on customer needs- concept generation- concept testing.
Identifying fabrication requirements- Identifying fabricators for the project- costing- financial
model for the product development-finding outside finance for product development if
possible and required -patent search for the product.
Alpha prototype fabrication and testing-to be submitted at the end of the semester
with customer acceptance survey
Course Evaluation
Theoretical and Practical part will be evaluated separately and grades will be awarded.
Theoretical component will be evaluated during the semester (50%) and the practical
component (50%) will be evaluated at the end of the semester.
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 234 | P age
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli
References
1. Karl T. Ulrich and Steven D. Eppinger, Product Design and Development, 7th Edition,
Tata McGraw-Hill. (2020)
2. Kevin Otto and Kristin Wood, Product Design, Published 2013 by Prentice Hall
3. Journals related to Engineering design.
Course Outcomes (CO)
On completion of this course, the students will be able to,
CO1 Make market surveys for new product development
CO2 Select an appropriate product design and development process for a given
application
CO3 Plan the entire cycle of new product design and development and fabricate
prototypes of new products and test them.
CO4 Choose an appropriate agronomy for the product and adopt methods to minimize
the cost.
Course Outcome and Programme Outcome Mapping
0 1 2 1 2 3
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 1 1 O O O
O O O O O O O O O O O O S S S
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
CO1 3 2 2 3 2 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 2
CO2 3 2 2 3 3 3 3 2 3 3 3 3 3 3 2
CO3 3 2 3 3 2 3 3 2 3 3 3 3 2 3 2
CO4 3 3 3 3 2 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 2 3 3
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 235 | P age
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli