Course Code : ECHO23
Course Title : DIGITAL SYSTEM DESIGN
Number of Credits 3
Prerequisites : ECPC14
(Course code)
Course Type : HO
Course learning Objective
 To get an idea about designing complex, high speed digital systems and how to implement
such design.
Course content
Mapping algorithms into Architectures: Datapath synthesis, control structures, critical path and worst
case timing analysis. FSM and Hazards.
Combinational network delay. Power and energy optimization in combinational logic circuit.
Sequential machine design styles. Rules for clocking. Performance analysis.
Sequencing static circuits. Circuit design of latches and flip-flops. Static sequencing element
methodology. Sequencing dynamic circuits. Synchronizers.
Data path and array subsystems: Addition / Subtraction, Comparators, counters, coding,
multiplication and division. SRAM, DRAM, ROM, serial access memory, context addressable
memory.
Reconfigurable Computing- Fine grain and Coarse grain architectures, Configuration architectures-
Single context, Multi context, partially reconfigurable, Pipeline reconfigurable, Block Configurable,
Parallel processing.
Text Books
1. N.H.E.Weste, D. Harris, CMOS VLSI Design (3/e), Pearson,2005.
2. W.Wolf, FPGA- based System Design, Pearson,2004.
Reference Books
1. S. Hauck, A.DeHon, ”Reconfigurable computing: the theory and practice of FPGA-based
computation”, Elsevier, 2008.
2. Franklin P. Prosser, David E. Winkel, Art of Digital Design, Prentice-Hall,1987.
3. R.F.Tinde,” Engineering Digital Design”, (2/e), Academic Press,2000.
4. C. Bobda, “Introduction to reconfigurable computing”, Springer, 2007.
5. M. Gokhale, ”Paul S. Graham, Reconfigurable computing: accelerating computation with
field- programmable gate arrays”, Springer,2005.
6. C.Roth, “Fundamentals of Digital Logic Design”, Jaico Publishers, V ed.,2009.
7. Recent literature in Digital System Design.
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able
CO1: identify mapping algorithms into architectures.
CO2: summarize various delays in combinational circuit and its optimization methods.
CO3: summarize circuit design of latches and flip-flops.
CO4: construct combinational and sequential circuits of medium complexity that is based on
VLSIs, and programmable logic devices.
CO5: summarize the advanced topics such as reconfigurable computing, partially
reconfigurable, Pipeline reconfigurable architectures and block configurable.
141 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015