Course Code : ICPE45
Course Title : Smart and Wireless Instrumentation
Type of Course : PE
Prerequisites : ICPC14
Contact Hours : 42 (3 credits)
Course Assessment Methods : Continuous Assessment, End Assessment
Course Learning Objectives (CLO)
CLO1 To expose to the basics of sensors used in industries.
CLO2 To provide adequate knowledge on smart instrumentation and wireless sensor
networks.
CLO3 To impart knowledge on various standard protocols used in wireless
instrumentation.
CLO4 To apply the knowledge of sensors, transceivers, controllers and power supplies
to implement a WSN for a required application.
Course Content
Sensor Classification-Thermal sensors -Humidity sensors -Capacitive Sensors-Planar Inter
digital Sensors-Planar Electromagnetic Sensors-Light Sensing Technology-Moisture Sensing
Technology-Carbon Dioxide (CO2) sensing technology-Sensors Parameters
Frequency of Wireless communication -Development of Wireless Sensor Network based
Project-Wireless sensor based on microcontroller and communication device-Zigbee
Communication device.
Power sources- Energy Harvesting –Solar and Lead acid batteries-RF Energy /Harvesting-
Energy Harvesting from Vibration-Thermal Energy Harvesting-Energy Management
Techniques-Calculation for Battery Selection
Brief description of API mode data Transmission-Testing the communication between
coordinator and remote XBee- Design and development of graphical user interface for
receiving sensor data using C++;
A brief review of signal processing techniques for structural health monitoring.
WSN based physiological parameters monitoring system- Intelligent sensing system for
emotion recognition-WSN based smart power monitoring system. Digital light processor (DLP)
References
1. Subhas Chandra Mukhopadhyay, Smart Sensors, Measurement and
Instrumentation, Springer Heidelberg, New York, Dordrecht London, 2013.
2. Halit Eren, Wireless Sensors and Instruments: Networks, Design and Applications,
CRC Press, Taylor and Francis Group, 2018.
3. Uvais Qidwai, Smart Instrumentation: A data flow approach to Interfacing, Chapman
and Hall, 1st Edition, 2019.
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 159 | P age
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli
Course Outcomes (CO)
On completion of this course, the students will be able to,
CO1 Understand about smart instrumentation system and wireless technologies in WSN
CO2 Design self-diagnosing instrumentation system.
CO3 Identify the issues in power efficient systems and implement energy management
techniques in WSN
CO4 Design wireless instrumentation systems for the given requirement.
Course Outcome and Programme Outcome Mapping
0 1 2 1 2 3
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 1 1 O O O
O O O O O O O O O O O O S S S
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
CO1 3 3 3 3 3 - - - 2 2 2 3 3 3 -
CO2 3 3 3 3 3 - - - 2 2 2 3 3 3 -
CO3 3 3 3 3 3 - - - 2 2 2 3 3 3 -
CO4 3 3 3 3 3 - - - 2 2 2 3 3 3 -
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 160 | P age
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli