Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
CE403 TRANSPORTATION ENGINEERING - II
Course objectives:
To know about the basics and design of various components of railway engineering
To study about the types and functions of track, junctions and railway stations
To learn about the aircraft characteristics, planning and components of airport
To study about the types and components of docks and harbours
To know about various urban transportation systems and Intelligent Transportation Systems
Course Content
Railway Engineering - Location surveys and alignment - Permanent way - Gauges - Components -
Functions and requirements - Geometric design
Track Junctions-Points and crossings - types and functions - design and layout - simple problems -
Railway stations and yards. Signaling and interlocking - control systems of train movements.
Airport Engineering-Aircraft characteristics - Airport obstructions and zoning - Runway - taxiways and
aprons- Terminal area planning
Docks and Harbours - Types - Layout and planning principles- breakwaters - docks- wharves and
quays - Transit sheds- warehouses- navigation aids.
Urban transportation systems - Bus transit - Mass Rapid Transit System - Light Rail Transit. Transport
economics and Financing - Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS)
References
1. M.M. Agarwal, Railway Engineering, Prabha & Co. 2007.
2. Khanna, S.K. and Arora, M.G. Airport Planning and Design, Nemchand and Bros. 1999.
3. Oza and Oza, Elements of Dock and Harbour Engineering, Charotar Publishing House, 1996.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
carry out the surveys for railways, airports and harbours
perform geometric design for the three modes
plan the layout of different types of terminals
apply the principles of bus transit, MRTS and LRT
demonstrate the fundamentals of Intelligent Transportation Systems
CE405 IRRIGATION AND HYDRAULIC STRUCTURES
Course Objectives:
To understand the basic types of irrigation, irrigation standards and crop water assessment
To study the different aspects of design of hydraulic structures
To provide knowledge on various hydraulic structures such as energy dissipaters, head and
cross regulators, canal falls and structures involved in cross drainage works
To understand the analysis of seepage and hydraulic jump
To design different types of dams
32
Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
Course Content
Irrigation - necessity - Types of irrigation - Methods of supplying water - Assessment of irrigation water
- Consumptive use and its determination - water requirement of various crops - Duty - Delta - Base
period and crop period.
Functions and components of a diversion head work - Function - selection of site - type of weirs on
pervious foundations - cause of failure - Bligh's creep theory and Khosla's theory - complete
design of a vertical drop weir.
Gravity dams - Non overflow section - forces acting - stability rules - elementary profile - Low and High
dams - drainage gallery - Construction joints - Earthen dams - stability of slopes by slip circle
method - seepage analysis and its control
Types of canals - canal alignment - Kennedy's silt theory - Lacey's silt theory - Design of canals
using the above theories - economical depth of cutting - canal losses - canal maintenance - lined
canals and their design - silt control measures.
Canal falls - Necessity and location - Design of sand type fall - design of a cross regulator - cross
drainage works - selection of suitable type of cross drainage work - canal outlets.
Note: Assignments include the design and drawings of various irrigation structures.
References
1. Punmia, B.C., Irrigation and Water Power Engineering, Standard Publishers, 2001.
2. Garg, S.K., Irrigation and Hydraulics Structures, Khanna Publishers, 1992.
3. Sharma, S.K., Principles and Practice of Irrigation Engg, S.Chand & Co, 1984.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
assess the irrigation needs of crops
design weirs on pervious foundation
design gravity dam and earthen dam
design the canal systems
select and design canal fall
HM401 INDUSTRIAL ECONOMICS
Course objectives:
To introduce the students to economic theories and their role in decision making in the
corporate world
To familiarize the students with microeconomics and macroeconomics theories
To enable the students have a clear understanding of the real-world causes and effects of
various market structures
To equip the students with necessary economic tools to analyse the price and output
determination in companies
To familiarize fiscal and monetary policy responses to macroeconomic instabilities such as
unemployment, inflation and economic growth
33
Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
Course Content
Demand and Supply - Forecasting techniques
Cost and Revenues -Competitive nature of the firms - Keynesian economics - National Income
Trade cycle - Inflation - Index numbers Capital budgeting - Impact of Liberalization, Privatization and
Globalization - Locating the firm in a global economy
Fiscal Policy - Taxation - Principles. Monetary policy - Functions of banks - Credit creation by
commercial banks.
References
1. Manb, Adhikari, Business Economics, Excel books.
2. Mishra S.K and Purin V.K, Economic Environment of business, HPH.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
apply economic theories
compare microeconomic and macroeconomic theories
determine price, output and profit in the market structure
apply appropriate tools and frameworks to analyse the different aspect of industry and market
conditions
evaluate fiscal and monetary policy responses to macroeconomic instabilities
CE407 COMPUTER AIDED DESIGN – II
Course objectives:
To learn the software developing skills for structural design
To understand the computing techniques in the field of transportation
To gain knowledge in networking and flowcharts in water resources
To understand the computing skills in the field of geotechnical engineering
To study the different software packages for analysis and design
Course Content
R.C.C: Slabs - Beams- Columns - Retaining walls.
Steel: Trusses - Beams - Columns - Column Bases - Plate girders - Gantry girders - Connections.
Transportation planning process- Trip generation and distribution- Network analysis - Shortest path
algorithms.
Water resources - Pipe networks - Canal design - Backwater profile - Synthetic derivation of stream
flows using random numbers - Dam stability
Analysis and design packages in Structural Engineering, Transportation Engineering, Water Resources
Engineering and Geotechnical Engineering
References
1. Krishnamoorthy, C.S. and Rajeev, S., Computer Aided Design and Analytical Tools, Narosa, 1993.
2. Papacostas, C.S., Fundamentals of Transportation Engineering Prentice-Hall of India, 2001.
34