Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
To estimate the engineering properties of the soils by density test, CBR test permeability
test and consolidation test
Course Content
1. Grain Size analysis
2. Consistency limits
3. Specific gravity
4. Permeability tests
5. Unconfined compression test
6. Direct shear test
7. Core cutter and sand replacement
8. Compaction test
9. California bearing ratio test
10. Vane shear test
11. Triaxial test
12. Consolidation test
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
classify soil by physical observation of the soils
classify soil based on estimated index and engineering characteristics of soils
carry out interpolation among the estimated soil design parameters
SEMESTER IV
MA202 NUMERICAL TECHNIQUES
Course objectives:
To study various numerical techniques
To study the behavior of the solution of linear/non-linear differential equations
To study the solution of heat conduction/ wave equation numerically
To find approximate solutions with minimum error
To learn algorithms for computers to solve problems in math, science and engineering
Course Content
Solution of linear system - Gaussian elimination and Gauss-Jordan methods - LV decomposition
methods - Crout's method - Jacobi and Gauss-Seidel iterative methods sufficient conditions for
convergence - Power method to find the dominant eigenvalue and eigenvector
Solution of nonlinear equation - Bisection method - Secant method - Regula falsi method - Newton-
Raphson method for f(x) = 0 and for f(x,y) = 0, g(x,y) = 0 - Order of convergence - Horner's method -
Graeffe's method - Bairstow's method.
Newton's forward backward and divided difference interpolation - Lagrange's interpolation - Numerical
Differentiation and Integration - Trapezoidal rule - Simpson's 1/3 and 3/8 rules - Curve fitting - Method
of least squares and group averages.
Numerical Solution of Ordinary Differential Equations- Euler's method - Euler's modified method -
11
Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
Taylor's method and Runge-Kutta method for simultaneous equations and 2nd order equations -
Multistep methods - Milne's and Adams' methods.
Numerical solution of Laplace equation and Poisson equation by Liebmann's method solution of one
dimensional heat flow equation - Bender - Schmidt recurrence relation Crank - Nicolson method -
Solution of one dimensional wave equation.
References
1. Gerald, CF., and Wheatley, P.O., Applied Numerical Analysis, Mis. Addison Wesley, 1989.
2. Jain, MK., Iyengar,S.R.,and Jain,R.K., Numerical Methods for Scientific and Engineering
Computation, Wiley Eastern, 1991.
3. Kandasamy, P.Thilagavathy, K., and Gunavathy,S., Numerical Methods, Chand and Co., 1997.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
solve linear and non-linear equations using numerical techniques
solve linear and non-linear differential equations using numerical techniques
solve a system of equations using the techniques studied
CE202 MECHANICS OF SOLIDS – II
Course objectives:
To understand the concept of Principle of virtual work
To study the different methods of finding deflection of beam
To analyze the Indeterminate beams subjected to various loading
To study the different methods to find the deflection of truss
To analyze the column with different end conditions and stress in thick cylinders
Course Content
Principle of virtual displacement and virtual forces - Castigliano's first theorem - Maxwell's reciprocal
theorem. Determination of deflection curve of beams- double integration - Macaulay's method - Area
moment method - Conjugate beam method - strain energy and dummy unit load approaches to
deflection of Simple and Curved members. Statically indeterminate Structures - Propped cantilever,
fixed and continuous beams - Theorem of three moments - Bending moment and shear force diagrams
Thick cylinders - Lame's equation - Shrink fit - compound cylinders.
Deflection of trusses - Dummy unit load method - Strain energy method - Williot Mohr's diagram
Theory of columns: Axial load- Euler's theory-Rankines formula, combined bending and axial load
References
1. Vazirani,V.N. and Ratwani, N.M. Strength of Materials, Vol. II, Kanna Publishers, 1996.
2. Timoshenko, S.P. and Gere, J.M. Mechanics of Materials, Tata McGraw Hill, 1992
3. Rajput R.K., Strength of Materials, S. Chand & Co., Ltd., 1996.
12