Course Code : ICPC13
Course Title : Signals and Systems
Type of Course : PC
Prerequisites : --
Contact Hours : 56 (4 credits)
Course Assessment Methods : Continuous Assessment, End Assessment
Course Learning Objectives (CLO)
CLO1 To introduce the student to identify and represent the type of signals and systems.
CLO2 To introduce the mathematical tools available to analyze continuous time signals
and systems.
CLO3 To introduce the mathematical tools available to analyze discrete time signals and
systems.
CLO4 To introduce about the random phenomena in the real world, the mathematical
models and pseudo- random signals in identifying systems.
Course Content
Introduction to signals – Transformation of the independent variable – Basic continuous-time
signals – Basic discrete-time signals – Step and Impulse functions – Sampling theorem.
Introduction to systems – Properties of systems – Classification of systems – Mathematical
model of systems – Concept of state variable – Normal form of system equations – Initial
conditions.
Impulse response of physical systems – Stability analysis of dynamic systems – Introduction
to convolution – Convolution integral – System impulse response and step response using
Laplace transform – Numerical convolution. Z-transform – Convergence of Z-transform –
Properties of Z-transform – Inversion of Z- transform –Application of Z-transform in analysis
of discrete-time systems – Evaluation of discrete-time system frequency response – Inverse
systems – Deconvolution.
Representation of signals in terms of elementary signals – Condition of orthogonality –
Representation of signals by elementary sinusoids – Fourier series representation of periodic
signals – Power spectrum. Fourier transform – System frequency response – Realizability of
frequency response – Energy spectrum. Calculation of simple transforms. Discrete-Fourier
transform (DFT) – Properties of Discrete Fourier Transform – Circular convolution.
Classification of random signals – Auto-correlation function – Properties of auto-correlation
function – Measurement of auto-correlation function – Application of auto-correlation
functions. Cross correlation functions. Sum of random processes- Spectral density – Relation
of spectral density to auto-correlation function
Auto-correlation function of system output - Cross-correlation between system input and
output. White noise - Analysis of linear systems in time-domain using white noise - Mean and
mean square value of system output. Generation of pseudo random binary noise (PRBN) and
its use in system identification - Analysis in frequency domain.
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 46 | Pa ge
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli
References
1. Gabel R.A. and Robert R.A., Signals and Linear Systems, John Wiley and Sons, 3rd
Edition, 1987
2. Oppenheim A.V., Wilsky and Nawab, Signals and Systems, Pearson India
Education Services Private limited India, 2nd Edition, 2016
3. Chen C.T., Systems and Signal Analysis - A Fresh Look, Oxford University Press India,
3rd Edition, 2004
4. B.P. Lathi, Principles of Linear Systems and Signals, Oxford University Press, 2nd
Edition, 2009
5. Cooper G.R and Mc Gillem C.D, Probabilistic Methods of Signals and System
Analysis, Oxford University Press, 3rd Edition, 1999
6. Chesmond, Wilson and Lepla, Advanced Control System Technology, Viva Books,
1st Edition, 1998
7. Ziemer R.E., Tranter W.H., and Fannin D.R., Signals and Systems: Continuous
and Discrete, Prentice Hall, 4th Edition, 1998
8. Oppenheim, Alan V and Verghes, G.G., Signals, Systems and Inference – Class Notes
for 6.011: Introduction to Communication, Control and Signal Processing, MIT Open
Courseware
Course Outcomes (CO)
On completion of this course, the students will be able to,
CO1 Classify the signals and systems based on their properties and determine the
response of LTI system using convolution
CO2 Analyze the spectral characteristics of continuous and discrete time signals and
systems using Fourier transforms.
CO3 Apply Laplace and Z transform to analyze continuous and discrete time systems
CO4 Understand the process of sampling, classify random signals using statistical
concepts and characterize systems using pseudo-random signals.
Course Outcome and Programme Outcome Mapping
0 1 2 1 2 3
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 1 1 O O O
O O O O O O O O O O O O S S S
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
CO1 3 3 3 2 3 2 - - - - - 2 3 3 -
CO2 3 3 2 2 3 2 - - - - - 3 3 3 -
CO3 3 3 3 3 3 1 1 - - - - 3 3 3 -
CO4 3 1 2 1 1 2 - - - - - 2 2 2 -
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 47 | Pa ge
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli