Course Code : ECHO30
Course Title : DIGITAL SIGNAL PROCESSING FOR MEDICAL IMAGING
Number of Credits 4
Prerequisites : ECPC15
(Course code)
Course Type : HO
Course content:
Sources of Medical Images: Physics of X-ray, CT, PET, MRI, and ultrasound, advantages and
disadvantages of each imaging modality.
Image Enhancement: Contrast adjustment, denoising (convolution, FFT), deblurring (solving an ill-
conditioned sparse linear system), edge detection (numerical approximation to a partial derivative),
anisotropic diffusion (numerical solution of partial differential equations), super-resolution.
Registration: Intensity-based methods, including a variety of cost functions (correlation, least
squares, mutual information, robust estimators), and optimization techniques (fixed-point iteration,
gradient descent, etc.). Implement registration for rigid and non-rigid transformations. MRI motion
compensation.
Segmentation & tissue classification: Thresholding, region growing and watershed. More depth on
the method of snakes (adaptive mesh), level set method (numerical solution of partial differential
equations), and clustering (classifiers).
Reconstruction Methods: Reconstruction techniques for CT (filtered back projection) and MRI
(using the FFT). Theory of the Radon transform, the Fourier transform, and how they relate to each
other.
Text Books
1. Jerry L. Prince, Jonathan M. Links, Medical imaging signals and systems, Pearson education,
second edition, 2014
2. Mark. A. Haidekkar, Medical Imaging technology, Springer briefs in physics,2013.
Reference Books
1. Paul suetens, Fundamentals of medical imaging, second edition, Cambridge university press,
2009.
2. Recent literature in Digital Signal Processing for Medical Imaging.
3. Geoff Dougherty, Digital image processing for medical applications, Cambridge
press
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able
CO1: Describe about different medical imaging modalities and its advantages and disadvantages
CO2: Describe the signal processing techniques involved in medical image enhancement techniques
CO3: Describe the signal processing techniques involved in image registration
CO4: Describe the signal processing techniques involved in segmentation and classification
CO5: Describe the signal processing techniques involved in image reconstruction.
149 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015