Course Code : ICPE59
Course Title : Modern Optimization Techniques and Algorithms
Type of Course : PE
Prerequisites : MAIR courses
Contact Hours : 42 (3 credits)
Course Assessment : Continuous Assessments (3), End Assessment (1)
Methods
Course Learning Objectives (CLO)
CLO1 To introduce and elaborate the field of optimization and applications in dynamical
systems and engineering.
CLO2 To gain understanding in the methods, both classical and modern, of obtaining
optimal solutions under various conditions.
CLO3 To estimate the size of search space in which solutions are sought and appreciate
the fundamentals of complex systems.
CLO4 To devise algorithmic optimal solutions via known methods such as Dynamic
Programming, and explore modern paradigms such as reinforcement learning for
solving a wider class of large-scale real-world problems
Course Content
Introduction – OR Models, Basic modelling with Linear Programming and its variants,
Deterministic Dynamic Programming, Decision Analysis & Games, Markovian Decision
Processes, Curse of Dimensionality, Heuristic Methods, e.g., GA, PSO etc.
Online learning – Adaptive learning, spanning lookup tables, parametric and nonparametric
models (including neural networks), The Reinforcement Learning Problem.
Derivative-based stochastic optimization – stochastic gradient methods, Step-size policies
and optimal policies; Derivative-free stochastic optimization – Multi-Armed Bandit Problem
and classes of policies applied to this broad problem class.
State-dependent problems – Modelling general dynamic problems, e.g., energy systems,
transportation systems, healthcare systems, as sequential decision problems, Designing
policies for a given problem.
Approximate Dynamic Programming – Policy function approximations and policy search,
Methods for performing search over tunable parameters: numerical derivatives,
backpropagation, and the policy-gradient method.
Cost function approximations – Parameterized optimization models widely used in industry
on an ad-hoc basis, Applications and Case Studies.
References
1. Hamdy A Taha, Operations Research: An Introduction, 9/e, Pearson, 2012.
2. Richard Bellman, Dynamic Programming, Dover Publications, 2003.
3. Richard Sutton, A.G. Barto, Reinforcement Learning: An Introduction, 2/e, MIT Press,
2018 (available as a free download).
4. Warren B Powell, Reinforcement Learning & Stochastic Optimization, John Wiley &
Sons, 2022.
5. Resources webpage on sequential decision analytics: https://tinyurl. com/sdalinks/
6. D. Bertsekas, Dynamic Programming and Optimal Control, vols. 1 & 2, Athena
Scientific, 2012
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 187 | P age
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli
Warren B. Powell, Sequential Decision Analytics and Modelling, NOW Publishing,
7. Boston, MA, 2022, https://tinyurl.com/ sdamodeling/ (available as a free download).
8. Paul J Nahin, When Least is Best, Princeton Univ. Press, 2004.
Course Outcomes (CO)
On completion of this course, the students will be able to,
CO1 Model engineering problems as computational optimization problems.
CO2 Understand the curse of dimensionality and need for heuristics in optimization in
terms of Genetic Algorithms and the like.
CO3 Cast engineering design as solution to dynamic optimization problems modelled in
learning paradigms.
CO4 Make meaningful objective functions for algorithmically arriving at optimal solutions.
Course Outcome and Programme Outcome Mapping
0 1 2 1 2 3
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 1 1 O O O
O O O O O O O O O O O O S S S
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
CO1
CO2
CO3
CO4
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 188 | P age
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli