Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
CURRICULUM
B. Tech. (CIVIL ENGINEERING)
The total minimum credits required for completing the B.Tech. Program in Civil Engineering is 178 (45 +
133).
SEMESTER III
Code Course of Study L T P C
MA203 Probability, Statistics and Linear programming 3 0 0 3
CE201 Mechanics of Solids-I 2 1 0 3
CE203 Mechanics of Fluids - I 2 1 0 3
CE205 Surveying - I 3 0 0 3
CE207 Geotechnical Engineering - I 3 0 0 3
CE209 Concrete Technology 3 0 0 3
CE211 Building Planning and Drawing 0 0 3 2
CE213 Survey Lab I 0 0 3 2
CE215 Geotechnical Lab 0 0 3 2
Total 16 2 9 24
SEMESTER IV
Code Course of Study L T P C
MA204 Numerical Techniques 2 1 0 3
CE202 Mechanics of Solids-II 2 1 0 3
CE204 Mechanics of Fluids - II 3 0 0 3
CE206 Surveying - II 3 0 0 3
CE208 Geotechnical Engineering - II 3 0 0 3
CE210 Environmental Engineering - I 3 0 0 3
CE214 Survey Lab II 0 0 3 2
CE216 Strength of Materials Lab 0 0 3 2
Total 16 2 6 22
SEMESTER V
Code Course of Study L T P C
CE301 Environmental Engineering - II 2 0 2 3
CE303 Structural Analysis - I 2 1 0 3
CE305 Concrete Structures -I 3 0 2 4
CE307 Steel Structures - I 2 0 2 3
CE309 Hydraulic Machinery 3 0 0 3
CE311 Advanced Strength of Materials 3 0 0 3
CE313 Fluid Mechanics Lab 0 0 3 2
CE315 Environmental Engineering Lab 0 0 3 2
Total 15 1 12 23
1
Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
SEMESTER III
MA203 PROBABILITY, STATISTICS AND LINEAR PROGRAMMING
Course objectives
To understand the concepts of Probability, Statistics and Linear Programming which arise in
engineering applications
To study the defects arising in any of the engineering products
To study the quality of the components purchased for the projects
To study the optimization techniques for various problems
To study the Transportation and Assignment problems
Course Content
Total, Compound, Marginal and conditional probability, Bayes' theorem - Binomial, Poisson and Normal
distributions, Moment generating function, Characteristic function
Central Limit Theorem, Law of large numbers, Tests of significance, large and small samples, t- test, F-
test and chi-square test for goodness of fit.
Estimation theory, ANOVA table and analysis, Multiple and partial correlation - Regression
Convex spaces, LPP statement, basic feasible solution, Graphical solution - Slack and surplus
variables - Artificial variable technique - Charne's penalty method - Two phase method - Dual simplex
method - Primal dual problems, Transportation and Assignment problems.
Integer programming - Gomory's cutting plane method - Branch and bound method
References
1. Gupta. S.C. and Kapoor. V.K., Fundamentals of Mathematical Statistics, 7th Edition, Sultan Chand
and Sons, 1980.
2. Kantiswarup, Gupta P.K. and Man Mohan, Operations Research, 11th Edition, Sultan Chand and
Sons, 2003.
Course outcomes
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
apply the principles and techniques learnt in this course for solving the practical problems which
arise in the industry
use Estimation Theory and Regression Analysis to estimate the present condition from previous
history in any real life situation
apply LPP to Transportations problems which is essential for a Civil Engineer
apply Probability in Reliability and life testing machine tools in Civil Engineering
solve the Linear Programming problems for minimizing the project cost and maximizing its profit
CE201 MECHANICS OF SOLIDS – I
Course objectives:
To learn about the concept of stress, strain and deformation of solid and state of stress
4
Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
To know the concepts of strain energy, principal stress and principal planes
To learn the bending moment, shear force and the corresponding stress distribution for
different types of beams
To learn the analysis of plane truss, thin cylinders and shells
To understand the theory of torsion and stresses in springs
Course Content
Tension, compression and shear stresses - Hooke's law - elastic constants - compound stresses -
composite bars - thermal stresses.
Strain Energy due to axial force - Resilience - stresses due to impact and suddenly applied load -
Principal stress and principal planes - Mohr's circle
Beams and support conditions -Types of supports and loads - shear force and bending moment - their
diagrams for simply supported beams, cantilevers and overhanging beams. Theory of simple bending -
Stress distribution at a cross section due to Bending Moment and Shear - strain energy.
Analysis of plane truss - Method of joints - Method of sections - Thin cylinders and shells.
Theory of torsion - Torsion of circular and hollow circular shafts and shear stresses due to torsion -
closed and open coiled helical springs - leaf spring.
References
1. Vazirani, V.N. and Ratwani, N.M., Strength of Materials, Vol I, Khanna Publishers, 1996.
2. Kazimi, Mechanics of Solids, Tata McGraw - Hill, 2004.
3. Timoshenko, S.P. and Gere, J.M., Mechanics of Materials, Tata McGraw Hill, 1992.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
determine the strength parameters of the materials
solve principal stress and principal plane problems
apply various methods of analysis of plane truss
determine shear force, bending moment, bending and shear stress distribution
analyze members subjected to torsion
CE203 MECHANICS OF FLUIDS – I
Course objectives:
To understand the properties of fluids and fluid statics
To derive the equation of conservation of mass and its application
To solve kinematic problems such as finding particle paths and stream lines
To use important concepts of continuity equation, Bernoulli’s equation and turbulence, and
apply the same to problems
To analyze laminar and turbulent flows
Course Content
Continuum concept - CGS, MKS and SI systems - Properties of Fluids - Ideal and real fluid - Pressure
at a point – pressure variation - pressure measurement
5
Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
Hydrostatic forces on plane and curved surfaces - Buoyancy and equilibrium - Metacentric height and
its determination-Types of flow - continuity equation for one, two and three dimensional flows - stream
function and velocity potential - flow net and its properties
Convective and local acceleration - Pressure, Kinetic and Datum energy - Bernoulli's theorem and
proof - Euler's equations of motion for a three dimensional flow and along a streamline - Deduction
of Bernoulli's theorem - Momentum equation - applications.
Reynold's experiment - Laminar and turbulent flow - Reynold's number - critical flow - Navier-
Stoke equations of motion - shear stress and pressure gradient - Laminar flow between parallel
plates - Couette flow - Hagen Poiseuille equation for flow through circular pipes.
Turbulence - semi empirical theories –Major losses - Darcy-Weisbach equation for flow through circular
pipe - Friction factor - Smooth and rough pipes - Moody diagram - flow through noncircular pipe -
Minor losses - pipes in series and parallel - Equivalent length - Introduction to water hammer
phenomena.
References
1. Nagaratnam, S., Fluid Mechanics, Khanna Publishers, 1995.
2. Natarajan, M.K. Principles of Fluid Mechanics, Oxford & IBH Publishing Co, 1994.
3. Jagdish Lal, Hydraulics and Fluid Mechanics, Tata McGraw Hill, 2001.
4. Streeter V.L., Fluid mechanics, Tata McGraw Hill, 1998.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
determine the properties of fluid and pressure and their measurement
compute forces on immersed plane and curved plates
apply continuity equation and energy equation in solving problems on flow through conduits
compute the frictional loss in laminar and turbulent flows
analyse flow between reservoirs
CE205 SURVEYING - I
Course objectives:
To understand the importance of surveying in the field of civil engineering
To study the basics of linear/angular measurement methods like chain surveying, compass
surveying
To study the significance of plane table surveying in plan making
To know the basics of levelling and theodolite survey in elevation and angular measurements
To understand tacheometric surveying in distance and height measurements
Course Content
Introduction and Principles of surveying – Classification – Brief introduction to chain surveying –
Chaining and ranging - Compass surveying – Prismatic compass only – Instruments – Bearing of
survey lines – systems and conversions – Local attraction – Latitude and departure – Traversing –
Traverse adjustment of closing errors.
6
Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
Plane Table surveying – instruments and accessories – advantages and disadvantages of plane table
surveying – methods – radiation, intersection, traversing, resection – Two and three point problems –
errors in plane table surveying.
Levelling – Definitions – Levelling instruments – Temporary and permanent adjustments – Booking –
Reduction to levels – Correction for Curvature and refraction – Classification of leveling – Profile
Levelling – Differential levelling – Reciprocal levelling – longitudinal and cross sectioning - Contours –
Contour interval – Methods of contouring – uses.
Theodolite surveying – Vernier theodolite – Temporary and permanent adjustments – Measurement of
horizontal and vertical angles – Methods of repetition and reiteration – errors in theodolite surveying –
elimination of errors - Area and volume computation – area from latitude and departure – Simpson’s
rule and Trapezoidal rule.
Tacheometric surveying – Principles – Methods – Stadia system –Fixed and Movable hair methods –
Methods with staff held vertical and normal – Analytic lens – Subtense bar – Tangential method.
References
1. Duggal, S.K. Surveying Vol. I and II, Tata McGraw Hill, 2004.
2. Punmia, B.C. Surveying Vol.I and II, Standard Publishers, 1994.
3. Arora, K. R. Surveying Vol. I and II, Standard Book House, 1996
.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
carry out preliminary surveying in the field of civil engineering applications such as structural,
highway engineering and geotechnical engineering
plan a survey, taking accurate measurements, field booking, plotting and adjustment of
traverse
use various conventional instruments involved in surveying with respect to utility and precision
plan a survey for applications such as road alignment and height of the building
undertake measurement and plotting in civil engineering
CE207 GEOTECHNICAL ENGINEERING - I
Course objectives:
To explain what Geotechnical Engineering is and how it is important to civil engineering
To explain how three phase system is used in soil and how are soil properties estimated using
three phase system
To explain role of water in soil behavior and how soil stresses, permeability and quantity of
seepage including flow net are estimated
To determine shear parameters and stress changes in soil due to foundation loads
To estimate the magnitude and time-rate of settlement due to consolidation
Course Content
Historical development of Soil Engineering - Origin and general types of soils - soil structure, clay
minerals-Three phase system- Identification and Classification of soils
7
Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
Soil water - capillary phenomena - concept of effective and neutral stresses - Permeability -
determination of coefficient of permeability in the laboratory - Seepage flow - Head, gradient,
pressure - steady state flow - two dimensional - flow net.
Vertical stress distribution in soil - Boussinesq and Westergaard's equation - Newmark's influence
chart - principle, construction and use - Equivalent point load and other approximate methods -
pressure bulb. Compaction
Shear strength - Mohr-Coulomb failure criterion - shear strength tests - Different drainage
conditions - Shear properties of cohesionless and cohesive soils - Use of Mohr's circle - relationship
between principal stresses and shear parameters.
Compressibility and consolidation - Terzaghi's one dimensional consolidation theory - pressure
void ratio relationship - preconsolidation pressure - Total settlement and time rate of settlement -
coefficient of consolidation - curve fitting methods - Correction for construction time.
References
1. Gopal Ranjan and Rao, P. Basic and Applied Soil Mechanics, New Age International Pvt. Limited,
New Delhi, 2002.
2. Murthy, V.N.S., A text book of Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering, UBS Publishers
Distributors Ltd., New Delhi, 1999
3. Punmia, B.C. Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering, Laxmi Publications Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi,
1995.
4. Braja M. Das, Fundamentals of Geotechnical Engineering, Thomson Asia Pvt. Ltd., Singapore,
2005.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
carry out soil classification
solve three phase system problems
solve any practical problems related to soil stresses estimation, permeability and seepage
including flow net diagram
estimate the stresses under any system of foundation loads
solve practical problems related to consolidation settlement and time rate of settlement
CE209 CONCRETE TECHNOLOGY
Course objectives:
To understand the properties of ingredients of concrete
To study the behavior of concrete at its fresh and hardened state
To study about the concrete design mix
To know about the procedures in concreting
To understand special concrete and their use
Course Content
Introduction - Concrete materials - Cement: Physical tests on cement - Concrete materials - Tests on
aggregates - Quality of Water for mixing and curing - use of sea water for mixing concrete
8
Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
Mix Design - factors influencing mix proportion - Mix design by ACI method and I.S. code method -
Design of high strength concrete.
Admixtures - accelerating admixtures - Retarding admixtures - water reducing admixtures - Air
entraining admixtures - coloring agent - Plasticizers. Batching - Mixing -Transportation - Placing of
concrete - curing of Concrete
Strength of Concrete - Shrinkage and temperature effects - creep of concrete - permeability of concrete
- durability of concrete - Corrosion - Causes and effects - remedial measures- Thermal properties of
concrete - Micro cracking of concrete.
Special Concrete - light weight concrete - Fibre reinforced concrete - Polymer-polymer modified
concrete - Ferrocement - Mass concrete - Ready mix concrete- Self compacting concrete- Quality
control - Sampling and testing-Acceptance criteria
References
1. Shetty, M.S., Concrete Technology, Theory & Practice, S.Chand and Co, 2004.
2. Gambhir, M.L., Concrete Technology, Tata McGraw Hill, 2004.
3. Nevile, Properties of Concrete, Longman Publishers, 2004.
4. Santakumar A.R., Concrete Technology, Oxford University Press, New Delhi, 2007.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
test all the concrete materials as per IS code
design the concrete mix using ACI and IS code methods
determine the properties of fresh and hardened of concrete
design special concretes and their specific applications
ensure quality control while testing/ sampling and acceptance criteria
CE211 BUILDING PLANNING AND DRAWING
Course objectives:
To understand the principles of planning and bylaws
To draw plan, elevation and section of load bearing and framed structures
To draw plan, elevation and section of public and industrial structures
To prepare detailed working drawing for doors, windows, etc.
Course Content
Classification of buildings - Principles of planning - Dimensions of buildings - Building bye-laws for floor
area ratio, open spaces - Orientation of buildings - Lighting and Ventilation- Planning and preparing
sketches and working drawings of Residential buildings (Flat and sloping roof), Schools, Hostels,
Hospitals, Single-storey factory buildings with trusses. Detailed working drawings of the component
parts - Doors and Windows - Roof Trusses - Staircases-Toilets
References
1. Shah M.G. Kalec. M. & Patki SY Building Drawing, Tata Mcgraw Hill, New Delhi, 2000
9