Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
apply mathematical adjustment of accidental errors involved in surveying measurements
plan a survey for applications such as road alignment and height of the building
invoke advanced surveying techniques over conventional methods in the field of civil
engineering
CE208 GEOTECHNICAL ENGINEERING – II
Course objectives:
To emphasize the importance of soil investigations including destructive and
nondestructive methods
To explain how earth pressure theory is important in retaining structure design
To explain the concept of bearing capacity and how to estimate the safe bearing capacity
for various foundation system including settlement consideration
To explain how do select a suitable shallow foundation system for various site conditions
and also analysis of different foundation system
To explain in what circumstances pile is needed and how do analysis the pile and pile
group under various soil conditions
Course Content
Soil exploration - Planning - Augur boring - Soundings - Sampling - Plate load test, static and dynamic
penetrations tests - geophysical explorations - Lateral Earth Pressure - Plastic equilibrium - Rankine's
theory - Active and passive earth pressure for cohesionless and cohesive soils - Earth pressure at rest
- Coloumb's wedge theory - Rebhann's and Culmann's graphical solutions, Stability analysis
Foundation - functions and requisites- Different types - choice of foundation type – general principles of
design. Bearing capacity - types of failures - Prandtl's and Terzaghi's bearing capacity analysis -
Bearing capacity based on settlement and building codes
Shallow foundation - spread footings - combined footings - trapezoidal and strap footings - Raft
foundation - Contact pressure distribution - settlement analysis - Types of settlement, control
Deep foundation - piles - types - load carrying capacity of pile - static and dynamic formula - pile load
test - penetration test - pile groups - Efficiency - Feld's rule - Converse Labarre formula,
Settlement of piles and pile groups - Negative skin friction - under reamed piles
References
1. Murthy, V.N.S, A text book of Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering, UBS Publishers &
Distributors Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi 1999.
2. Punmia, B.C., Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering, Laxmi Publications Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi,
1995.
3. Gopal Ranjan and Rao, Basic and Applied Soil Mechanics, New Age International (P) Limited,
New Delhi, 2002.
4. Braja M. Das, Principles of Foundation Engineering, Thomson Asia Pvt. Ltd., Singapore, 2005.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
carry out soil investigation for any civil engineering construction
analyse earth retaining structures for any kind of soil medium
15