CE459 Models for Air and Water Quality 3 0 0 3
CE459 MODELS FOR AIR AND WATER QUALITY
Course objectives:
To introduce the mathematical models and the modeling approach to water quality
to present the mass balance basis for water quality models, simplified water quality models for
streams and rivers, lakes and reservoirs for conservative and non-conservative materials
to describe the various models for microbial growth and limitations
to address the simple air quality models for point and line sources
to review the simple models for estuaries
Course Content
Introduction to Mathematical Models: Modeling approaches to water quality - classification of models
Mathematical models for water quality - model development, calibration and verification - cost: benefit
analysis using models, Model requirements and limitations. D.O. Models for Streams: Dissolved oxygen
model for streams - sources and sinks of dissolved oxygen
44
Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
Estimation of system parameters - Streeter - Phelps model - oxygen 'sag' curve - determination of
deoxygenation and reaeration coefficients - Benthal oxygen demand - mass transport mechanisms -
Advective and diffusive mass transport
Models by O'connor, Dobbins and Thomann. Models for Estuary and Lakes: Physical chemical and
biological processes in estuaries - water quality distribution in estuaries - modeling estuaries and lakes
for water quality - temperature models for lakes and rivers
Models for microorganisms decay, nitrogen and phytoplankton. Air quality models: Micrometeorological
processes, wind rose, dispersion, coefficients and stability classes, Gaussian and dispersion model,
Regional air quality models,
References
1. Chapra, Steven C., "Surface water quality modeling", McGraw Hill Book Company, New York,
1997.
2. Gilbert M. Masters, "Introduction to Environmental Engineering and Science", 2nd Edition, Prentice
Hall, 1998.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
evaluate the physical, chemical and biological water quality which is essential for the abatement
of water pollution
predict the quality of water and air through modeling
recognize the risks of disposal of treated wastewater into the river
design sound and sustainable water and air models under specified conditions