CE453 Remote Sensing and GIS 3 0 0 3
CE453 REMOTE SENSING AND GIS
Course objectives:
To know about the principles of remote sensing and spectral signatures
To know about satellites, types of remote sensing and digital image processing
To study about the history and components of GIS
To study about data types and operations
To know the applications of remote sensing and GIS
Course Content
Remote Sensing – Principle - Electro-magnetic energy, spectrum - EMR interaction with atmosphere –
Atmospheric Windows and its Significance – EMR interaction with Earth Surface Materials – Spectral
Signature and Spectral Signature curves for water, soil and Earth Surface.
Satellites - Classification – Satellite Sensors – satellite and sensor parameters - Resolution – Types of
Remote Sensing - Visual Interpretation of Satellite Images – Digital Image processing – Characteristics
of different platforms: Landsat, SPOT, IRS series, IKONOS, QUICKBIRD – Radar, LIDAR, SAR,
MODIS, AMSRE, Sonar remote sensing systems.
39
Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
GIS - History of Development - Components of GIS – Hardware, Software and Organizational Context –
Data – Spatial and Non-Spatial – Data Input Sources–– DBMS – Data Output - Data models - Raster
and Vector data structures – Data compression – Raster vs. vector comparison
Analysis using Raster and Vector data – Operations – Overlaying - Buffering – Modelling in GIS - Digital
Terrain Modelling, Analysis and application – Products of DEMs and their uses – Sources of errors in
GIS and their elimination
Applications of Remote Sensing and GIS – Advanced applications of GIS – Disaster management,
Water resource, Landuse – Land cover – Urban planning - Intelligent Transport Systems - Development
of Resources Information Systems.
References
1. Burrough P.A. and Rachel A. McDonell, Principles of Geographical Information Systems, Oxford
Publication, 2004.
2. C.P. Lo and Albert K. W. Yeung, Concepts and Techniques of Geographical Information Systems,
Prentice- Hall India, 2006.
3. Thomas. M. Lillesand and Ralph. W. Kiefer, Remote Sensing and Image Interpretation, John Wiley
and Sons, 2003.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
demonstrate the concepts of Electro Magnetic energy, spectrum and spectral signature curves
apply the concepts of satellite and sensor parameters and characteristics of different platforms
apply the concepts of DBMS in GIS
analyze raster and vector data and modelling in GIS
apply GIS in land use, disaster management, ITS and resource information system