Course Code : ICPC25
Course Title : Logic and Distributed Control Systems
Type of Course : PC
Prerequisites : ICPC16
Contact Hours : 56 (4 credits)
Course Assessment Methods : Continuous Assessment, End Assessment
Course Learning Objectives (CLO)
CLO1 To introduce the importance of process automation techniques.
CLO2 To impart knowledge in PLC based programming.
CLO3 To introduce distributed control system and different communication protocols.
CLO4 To have adequate information with respect to interfaces used in DCS
Course Content
Review of PC based control design for process automation: Functional Block diagram of
Computer control of process - Mathematical representation – Sampling Consideration- Data
Acquisition system and SCADA, Hybrid, Direct Digital Control System, Distributed Control
System architecture and Comparison with respect to different performance attributes.
Programmable logic controller (PLC) basics: Definition, overview of PLC systems, Block
diagram of PLC. General PLC programming procedures: ON/OFF instruction, Timer
instruction sets, Counter Instruction sets -Design, development and simulation of PLC
programming using above instruction sets for simple applications.
PLC Data manipulation instruction - Arithmetic and comparison instruction- Skip, Master
Control Reset (MCR) and Zone Control Last state (ZCL) instruction – PID and other important
instruction set. PLC Installation, troubleshooting and maintenance. Design of alarm and
interlocks, networking of PLC – Case studies using above instruction sets.
Distributed Control System: Local Control Unit (LCU) architecture - Comparison of different
LCU architectures – LCU Process Interfacing Issues: - Block diagram, Overview of different
LCU security design approaches, secure control output design, Manual and redundant backup
designs.
LCU communication Facilities - Communication system requirements – Architectural Issues –
Operator Interfaces – Engineering Interfaces. Development of Field Control Unit (FCU)
diagram for simple control applications.
Introduction to Networking and components of Computer Networks – Industrial Data
communication protocols - Introduction to HART and Field bus protocol. Interfacing Smart field
devices (wired and wireless) with DCS controller. Introduction to Object Linking and
Embedding (OLE) for Process Control -Automation in the cloud with case studies.
References
1. John W. Webb and Ronald A. Reis, Programmable Logic Controllers - Principles
and Applications, Prentice Hall Inc., New Jersey, 5th Edition,2003
2. Lukcas M.P Distributed Control Systems, Van Nostrand Reinhold Co., New York, 1986
3. Frank D. Petruzella, Programmable Logic Controllers, McGraw Hill, New York, 6th
Edition, 2023
4. Deshpande P. Band Ash R.H., Elements of Process Control Applications, ISA Press,
New York 1995
5. Curtis D. Johnson, Process Control Instrumentation Technology, Pearson New
International, 8th Edition, 2013
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 72 | Pa ge
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli
6. Krishna Kant, Computer-based Industrial Control, Prentice Hall, New Delhi, 2ndEdition,
2011
Course Outcomes (CO)
On completion of this course, the students will be able to,
CO1 Understand various process automation technologies.
CO2 Design and develop a PLC ladder programming for simple process applications.
CO3 Apply different security design approaches, engineering and operator interface
issues for designing of Distributed Control System.
CO4 Describe the operation of latest communication technologies like HART and Field
bus protocol.
Course Outcome and Programme Outcome Mapping
0 1 2 1 2 3
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 1 1 O O O
O O O O O O O O O O O O S S S
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
CO1 3 3 3 2 2 3 2 1 3 1 1 3 3 3 1
CO2 3 3 3 3 3 2 2 1 3 2 2 3 3 3 1
CO3 3 3 3 3 3 2 2 1 3 2 2 3 3 3 1
CO4 3 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 2 1 1 3 3 2 1
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 73 | Pa ge
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli
ESSENTIAL PROGRAMME LABORATORY REQUIREMENT (LR)
COURSES
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 74 | Pa ge
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli