Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
demonstrate the functions of planning and financing agencies
apply the town and country plan act and building by-laws
MA302 OPERATIONS RESEARCH TECHNIQUES IN CIVIL ENGINEERING
Course objectives:
To study various optimization techniques in real world problems related to civil engineering
To study the inventory models
To study about assigning jobs to people in an efficient way
To study about sequencing techniques
Course Content
Inventory with uniform demand with finite rate of replenishment without and with shortage - Buffer stock
- Price break
Queuing Theory - M/M/1 and M/M/C models with infinite and finite waiting space.
Dynamic programming - Principle of optimality - recursive equation approach - application to allocation
shortest path and production schedule - Sequencing - Johnson's algorithm - n jobs through 2 machines,
n jobs through m machines, 2 jobs through 2 machines.
Replacement problem - Present worth factor - Group replacement - Nonlinear programming -
Lagrange's multiplier's method - Kuhn-Tucker's condition - Quadratic programming - Wolfe's method.
References
1. Taha, H.A., Operations Research: An Introduction, Prentice Hall of India, New Delhi, 2003.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
solve the optimization problems
apply LPP to Transportations problems which is essential for a Civil Engineer
solve assignment problems in an easy way
assess the real conditions of a project so that loss can be avoided
solve the Linear programming problems for minimizing the project cost and maximizing its
profit
HM404 CREATIVE WRITING THROUGH LITERATURE
Course objectives:
To motivate the students for creative writing
To familiarize them with literary Forms and Figures of speech
To expose them to the attractions and the challenges involved in creative writing
To emphasize the need for sustained effort at developing creativity
To enable them to write poems. Short stories, blogs, essays which can be published in
magazines or web journals
51
Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
Course Content
Understanding literary forms - Thinking about texts: Role-playing the Reader, the Author, and the
Individual as both the Reader-Author - Intensive reading of a poem, short story, a novel, a bestseller, a
film, a drama, an essay, a news story, an Ad-campaign, an Interview - Designing the individual reading
list. Pursuing one’s own competence.
Dissertation: Performance in the chosen genre.
References
1. Abrams, M.H. A Glossary of Literary Terms. (Seventh Edition). Thomson: New York. 1999.
2. Packard, William. The Poet’s Craft. Virago: New York. 2003.
3. Tuchman, Barbara. Practising History. Routledge: London, 2006.
4. Bowra, C.M. The Romantic Imagination.Faber: London. 1965.
5. Wallace, Irving. The Making of a Bestseller. Corgi: New York, 1984
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
apply various sources of creative writing like a museum, an Archive, the Library, the
newspaper, Film, the advertisement
demonstrate a variety of genres of Creative Literature like the Poem, the Novel, the Film, and
the image
demonstrate ideas like Postcolonialism, De-Colonizing the mind, working in white spaces,
Postmodernism, Existentialism
develop the language, methodology and vocabulary to read and criticize a poem, a film, a
novel, an advertisement
apply the methods of Creative thinkers and writers like S T Coleridge, Ngugi Wa Thiongo, Sri
Aurobindo, Vikram Chandra, Raja Rao, and Salman Rushdie
52