Course Code : ECMI11
Course Title : NETWORK ANALYSIS AND SYNTHESIS
Number of Credits 3
Prerequisites : NONE
(Course code)
Course Type : MI
Course Learning Objectives
 To make the students capable of analysing any given electrical network.
 To make the students to learn synthesis of an electrical network for a given impedance/
admittance function.
Course Content
Network concept. Elements and sources. Kirchhoff’s laws. Tellegen’s theorem. Network equilibrium
equations. Node and Mesh method. Source superposition. Thevenin’s and Norton’s theorems.
Network graphs.
First and second order networks. State equations. Transient response. Network functions.
Determination of the natural frequencies and mode vectors from network functions.
Sinusoidal steady-state analysis. Maximum power-transfer theorem. Resonance. Equivalent and dual
networks. Design of equalizers.
Two-port network parameters. Interconnection of two port networks. Barlett’s bisection theorem.
Image and
Iterative parameters. Design of attenuators.
Two-terminal network synthesis. Properties of Hurwitz polynomial and Positive real function.
Synthesis of LC, RC and RL Networks, Foster Forms and Cauer Forms.
Text Books
1. Hayt W. H., Kemmerly J. E. and Durbin S. M., “Engineering Circuit Analysis”, 6th Ed., Tata
McGraw-Hill Publishing Company Ltd., 2008.
2. F.F. Kuo, “Network analysis and Synthesis”, Wiley International Edition, 2008.
Reference Books
1. Valkenberg V., “Network Analysis”, 3rd Ed., Prentice Hall International Edition, 2007.
2. B.S.Nair and S.R.Deepa, “Network analysis and Synthesis”, Elsevier, 2012.
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able
CO1: analyze the electric circuit using network theorems
CO2: understand and Obtain Transient & Forced response
CO3: determine Sinusoidal steady state response; understand the real time applications of
maximum power transfer theorem and equalizer
CO4: understand the two–port network parameters, are able to find out two-port network
parameters & overall response for interconnection of two-port networks.
CO5: synthesize one port network using Foster form, Cauer form.
103 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015