Course Code : ECPE17
Course Title : STATISTICAL THEORY OF COMMUNICATION
Number of Credits 3
Prerequisites : NONE
(Course code)
Course Type : PE
Course Learning Objective
 The subject aims to make the students to understand the statistical theory of
telecommunication, which are the basics to learn analog and digital telecommunication.
Course Content
Information measure. Discrete entropy. Joint and conditional entropies. Uniquely decipherable and
instantaneous codes. Kraft-McMillan inequality. Noiseless coding theorem. Construction of optimal
codes.
DMC. Mutual information and channel capacity. Shannon’s fundamental theorem. Entropy in the
continuous case. Shannon-Hartley law.
Binary hypothesis testing. Baye’s, mini max and Neyman-Pearson tests. Random parameter
estimation-MMSE, MMAE and MAP estimates. Non-random parameters – ML estimation.
Coherent signal detection in the presence of additive white and non-white Gaussian noise. Matched
filter.
Discrete optimum linear filtering. Orthogonality principle. Spectral factorization. FIR and IIR Wiener
filters.
Text Books
1. R.B.Ash,” Information Theory”, Wiley, 1965.
2. M.D.Srinath, P.K.Rajasekaran & R.Viswanathan, “Statistical Signal Processing with
Applications”, PHI 1999.
Reference Books
1. H.V.Poor, “An Introduction to Signal Detection and Estimation, (2/e)”, Spring Verlag.1994.
2. M.Mansuripur, “Introduction to Information Theory”, Prentice Hall.1987.
3. J.G.Proakis, D G Manolakis, “Digital Signal Processing”, (4/e), Pearson Education, 2007.
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able
CO1: show how the information is measured and able to use it for effective coding.
CO2: summarize how the channel capacity is computed for various channels.
CO3: use various techniques involved in basic detection and estimation theory to solve the
problem.
CO4: summarize the applications of detection theory in telecommunication.
CO5: summarize the application of estimation theory in telecommunication.
39 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015