Course Code : ECHO24
Course Title : OPTIMIZATIONS OF DIGITAL SIGNAL PROCESSING
STRUCTURES FOR VLSI
Number of Credits (3-1-0 ) 4
Prerequisites : ECPC20
(Course code)
Course Type : HO
Course learning Objectives
 To understand the various VLSI architectures for digital signal processing.
 To know the techniques of critical path and algorithmic strength reduction in the filter
structures.
 To enable students to design VLSI system with high speed and low power.
 To encourage students to develop a working knowledge of the central ideas of implementation
of DSP algorithm with optimized hardware.
Course content
An overview of DSP concepts, Typical DSP Algorithms, DSP Applications Demands and Scaled
CMOS Technologies, Pipelining of FIR filters. Parallel processing of FIR filters. Pipelining and
parallel processing for low power, Combining Pipelining and Parallel Processing.
Transformation Techniques: Iteration bound, Retiming, Unfolding, Folding and Folding of Multirate
Systems.
Pipeline interleaving in digital filters. Pipelining and parallel processing for IIR filters and Higher
order IIR filters, Low power IIR filter design using pipelining and parallel processing and Low Power
Higher order filters, Pipelined adaptive digital filters.
Algorithms for fast convolution: Cook-Toom Algorithm, Winograd Algorithm, Iterative Convolution,
Cyclic Convolution. Algorithmic strength reduction in filters and transforms: Parallel FIR Filters,
DCT and inverse DCT, Parallel Architectures for Rank-Order Filters.
Synchronous pipelining and clocking styles, clock skew and clock distribution in bit level pipelined
VLSI designs. Wave pipelining, constraint space diagram and degree of wave pipelining,
Implementation of wave-pipelined systems, Asynchronous pipelining, Implementation of
computational units using Asynchronous pipelining.
.
Text Book
1. K.K.Parhi, VLSI Digital Signal Processing Systems, John-Wiley, 2007.
Reference Books
1. U. Meyer -Baese, Digital Signal Processing with FPGAs, Springer, 2004
2. Wayne Burleson, Konstantinos Konstantinides, Teresa H. Meng, VLSI Signal Processing,
1996.
3. Richard J. Higgins, Digital signal processing in VLSI, 1990.
4. Sun Yuan Kung, Harper J. Whitehouse, VLSI and modern signal processing, 1985
5. Magdy A. Bayoumi, VLSI Design Methodologies for Digital Signal Processing, 2012
6. Earl E. Swartzlander, VLSI signal processing systems, 1986.
142 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able
CO1: understand the overview of DSP concepts and design architectures for DSP algorithms.
CO2: improve the overall performance of DSP system through various transformation and
optimization techniques.
CO3: perform pipelining and parallel processing on FIR and IIR systems to achieve high speed
and low power.
CO4: optimize design in terms of computation complexity and speed.
CO5: understand clock based issues and design asynchronous and wave pipelined systems.
143 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015