Course Code : ECPE47
Course Title : Image and Video Processing
Number of Credits : 3
Prerequisites : NONE
(Course code)
Course Type : Elective
COURSE LEARNING OBJECTIVE
 The course aims to equip students with basic image and video processing techniques.
COURSE CONTENTS
Image Formation and Representation: 3D to 2D projection, photometric image formation, trichromatic
colour representation, video format (SD, HD, UHD, HDR), contrast enhancement (concept of
histogram, nonlinear mapping, histogram equalization)
Review of 1D Fourier transform and convolution: Concept of spatial frequency. Continuous and
Discrete Space 2D Fourier transform. 2D convolution and its interpretation in frequency domain.
Implementation of 2D convolution. Separable filters. Frequency response. Linear filtering (2D
convolution) for noise removal, image sharpening, and edge detection. Gaussian filters, DOG and
LOG filters as image.
Geometric mapping and Feature detection: Geometric mapping (affine, homography), Feature based
camera motion estimation (RANSAC). Image warping. Image registration. Panoramic view stitching,
Feature detection (Harris corner, scale space, SIFT), feature descriptors (SIFT). Bag of Visual Word
representation for image classification.
Motion estimation: optical flow equation, optical flow estimation (Lucas-Kanade method, KLT
tracker); block matching, multi-resolution estimation. Deformable registration (medical applications),
Moving object detection (background/foreground separation): Robust PCA (low rank + sparse
decomposition). Global camera motion estimation from optical flows. Video stabilization. Video
scene change detection.
Video Coding: block-based motion compensated prediction and interpolation, adaptive spatial
prediction, block-based hybrid video coding, rate-distortion optimized mode selection, rate control,
Group of pictures (GoP) structure, tradeoff between coding efficiency, delay, and complexity, depth
from disparity, disparity estimation, view synthesis. Multiview video compression. Depth camera
(Kinect). 360 video camera and view stitching.
Text Book/References:
1. Richard Szeliski, Computer Vision: Algorithms and Applications. (Available online:”Link“)
(Cover most of the material, except sparsity-based image processing and image and video
coding)
2. (Optional) Y. Wang, J. Ostermann, and Y.Q.Zhang, Video Processing and Communications.
Prentice Hall, 2002. “Link” (Reference for image and video coding, motion estimation, and
stereo)
3. (Optional) R. C. Gonzalez and R. E. Woods, Digital Image Processing, Prentice Hall, (3rd
Edition) 2008. ISBN number 9780131687288. “Link” (Good reference for basic image
processing, wavelet transforms and image coding).
COURSE OUTCOMES
Students are able to
CO1: Understand the concept of image formation and representation
CO2: Know the need of transformation and convolution
CO3: Understand the necessity and importance of feature detection and geometric mapping
CO4: Know how to do motion estimation in video
CO5: To understand the basic ideas of video coding
70 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015