Course Code : ECPC19
Course Title : DIGITAL COMMUNICATION
Number of Credits 3
Prerequisites : ECPC10
(Course code)
Course Type : PC
Course Learning Objectives
 To understand the key modules of digital communication systems with emphasis on digital
modulation techniques.
 To get introduced to the basics of source and channel coding/decoding and Spread Spectrum
Modulation.
Course Content
Base band transmission. Sampling theorem, Pulse code modulation (PCM), DM, Destination SNR in
PCM systems with noise. Matched filter. Nyquist criterion for zero ISI. Optimum transmit and receive
filters. Correlative Coding, M-ary PAM. Equalization- zero-forcing and basics of adaptive linear
equalizers.
BASK, BFSK, and BPSK- Transmitter, Receiver, Signal space diagram, Error probabilities.
M-ary PSK, M-ary FSK, QAM, MSK and GMSK- Optimum detector, Signal constellation, error
probability.
Linear block codes-Encoding and decoding. Cyclic codes – Encoder, Syndrome Calculator.
Convolutional codes – encoding, Viterbi decoding. TCM.
Spread Spectrum (SS) Techniques- Direct Sequence Spread Spectrum modulation, Frequency-hop
Spread Spectrum modulation - Processing gain and jamming margin.
Text Books
1. S.Haykin, “Communication Systems”, Wiley, (4/e), 2001.
2. J.G.Proakis, “Digital Communication”, Tata McGraw – Hill, (4/e), 2001.
Reference Books
1. B.Sklar, “Digital Communications: Fundamentals & Applications”, Pearson Education,
(2/e), 2001.
2. A.B.Carlson, “ Communication Systems”, McGraw Hill, 3/e,2002
3. R.E.Zimer & R.L.Peterson,” Introduction to Digital Communication”, PHI,3/e, 2001
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able
CO1: Apply the knowledge of signals and system and explain the conventional digital
communication system.
CO2: Apply the knowledge of statistical theory of communication and evaluate the
performance of digital communication system in the presence of noise.
CO3: Describe and analyze the performance of advance modulation techniques.
CO4: Apply the knowledge of digital electronics and describe the error control codes like
block code, cyclic code.
CO5: Describe and analyze the digital communication system with spread spectrum
modulation.
26 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015