Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
SEMESTER VII
CE401 MATRIX METHODS OF STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS
Course objectives:
To understand the importance of degrees of freedom and the concept of principle of
superposition
To know about the concept of strain energy and principle of virtual work
To study the transformation of system matrices and element matrices for the determinate and
indeterminate structures
To analyze the forces in structures like continuous beam, truss and frames using stiffness and
flexibility method
To understand the behavior of structures due to thermal expansion and lack of fit
Course Content
Generalized measurements - Degrees of freedom - Constrained Measurements - Behavior of
structures - Principle of superposition. Stiffness and flexibility matrices - Constrained measurements -
Stiffness and flexibility coefficients from virtual work.
Strain energy - Stiffness and flexibility matrices from strain energy - Symmetry and other properties
of stiffness and flexibility matrices - Betti's law and its applications - Strain energy in systems and in
elements.
Determinate and indeterminate structures - Transformation of element matrices to system matrices -
Transformation of system vectors to element vectors - Normal coordinates and orthogonal
transformations.
Flexibility method applied to statically determinate and indeterminate structures - Choice of
redundants - Transformation of redundants - Internal forces due to thermal expansion and lack of fit.
Development of the method - Internal forces due to thermal expansion and lack of fit - Application
to symmetrical structures - Comparison between stiffness and flexibility methods.
References
1. Moshe, F., Rubenstein, Matrix Computer Analysis of Structures, Prentice Hall, New York, 1986.
2. Rajasekaran S, Computational Structural Mechanics, Prentice Hall of India, New Delhi, 2001
3. Manickaselvam V.K., Elements of Matrix and Stability Analysis of Structures, Khanna Publishers,
New Delhi, 1998.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
apply the basic concepts of matrix methods in structural analysis
develop stiffness and flexibility matrices
analyze the structures using flexibility and stiffness method
transform system coordinates to element coordinates
determine the forces in various members due to lack of fit and thermal expansion
31