Course Code : ICPE61
Course Title : CMOS Analog IC Design
Type of Course : PE
Prerequisites : ICPC12, ICPC20
Contact Hours : 42 (3 credits)
Course Assessment Methods : Continuous Assessments, End Assessment
Course Learning Objectives (CLO)
CLO1 To develop skill for analog circuit design specifically relevant to CMOS IC design.
CLO2 To develop ability for the analysis of CMOS circuit noise and mismatch, and their
impact on the circuit design.
CLO3 To develop skills to design and analyze several types of CMOS OpAmp at the
transistor level.
Course Content
Introduction to MOSFETs, Simple MOSFET Circuits, MOSFET Current Mirrors, Cascode
Amplifiers, MOSFET in Integrated Circuits, MOSFET Capacitances, Noise of Simple Circuits,
Systematic Mismatch, Random Mismatch, Differential Amplifiers.
Concept of feedback, stability of negative feedback systems, dominant pole compensation,
active load, differential amplifiers - noise and offset, slew rate, OTA, working principles and
different types, datasheet, design example, folded-cascode, working principles and different
types.
Multi-stage amplifier, step response, sinusoidal steady state response, loop gain and unity
loop gain frequency, OpAmp realization using controlled sources; delay in the loop, negative
feedback amplifier with ideal delay-small delays and large delays, negative feedback
amplifier with parasitic poles and zeros, Nyquist criterion, Phase margin.
Single stage OpAmp, folded cascode opamp, telescopic opamp, Two and three stage miller
compensated OpAmp, feedforward compensated OpAmp, two stage OpAmp, three stage
and triple cascade OpAmp, common mode rejection ratio, fully differential single stage
opamp, common mode feedback, fully differential two stage opamp; fully differential versus
pseudo-differential, Introductory concept of PLL and VCO.
References
1. B.Razavi, Design of Analog CMOS Integrated Circuits, McGraw Hill Edition2002.
2. Paul. R.Gray, Robert G. Meyer, “Analysis and Design of Analog Integrated Circuits,
Wiley, (4/e), 2001.
3. Analog Integrated Circuit Design" by David A. Johns and Ken Martin
4. CMOS Analog Circuit Design" by Phillip E. Allen and Douglas R. Holberg
5. Analog Circuit Design: Discrete and Integrated" by Sergio Franco
6. R. Jacob Baker, “CMOS Circuit Design, Layout, and Simulation, Wiley, (3/e),2010.
7. The Art of Electronics by Paul Horowitz and Winfield Hill
8. Analog Design for CMOS VLSI Systems by Franco Maloberti
9. CMOS VLSI Design: A Circuits and Systems Perspective by Neil H.E. Weste and
David Money Harris
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 191 | P age
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli
Course Outcomes (CO)
On completion of this course, the students will be able to,
CO1 Design CMOS based analog integrated circuits (IC) and analyze their performance.
CO2 Understand the negative feedback control applied in the design of CMOS circuit.
CO3 Examine the noise found in CMOS circuits and frequency response of CMOS
circuits and assess its impact on circuit performance.
CO4 Develop and evaluate various CMOS operational amplifier (OpAmp) designs at the
transistor level.
Course Outcome and Programme Outcome Mapping
0 1 2 1 2 3
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 1 1 O O O
O O O O O O O O O O O O S S S
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
CO1 3 3 3 3 3 - - - - 1 1 2 3 3 -
CO2 3 3 3 3 3 - - - - 1 2 2 3 3 -
CO3 3 3 3 3 3 - - - - 1 1 2 3 3 -
CO4 3 3 3 3 3 - - - - 1 2 2 3 3 -
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 192 | P age
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli