Course Code : ICHO18
Course Title : Project-based Learning
Type of Course : HO
Prerequisites : -
Contact Hours : 56 (4 credits)
Course Assessment Methods : Continuous Assessment, End Assessment
Course Learning Objectives (CLO)
CLO1 To enable the student to design, develop and construct hands-on solution to a
problem.
CLO2 To build student’s creative capacity to work through problems that may or may not
be well-defined.
CLO3 To provide students opportunities to work across disciplines, on real-world
problems of technical interest
CLO4 To foster student independence, ownership of his/her work and the development of
practical skills that are valued at the workplace.
Course Content
The course provides an opportunity to the students to carry out semester-long research and
development project in an identified area of research, with the guidance of a faculty supervisor.
The activities are designed in an engaging experience, in such a way that the academic skills,
capabilities and logical thinking converge towards solving of open ended problems.
The typical phases of the work done by the student could be:
• Problem identification: Defining a problem in terms of given constraints or challenges
• Devising solutions: Listing down possible multiple ideas to solve a problem, and
choosing the potential solution path to the problem (i.e., how to achieve the solution)
• Prototyping: Designing and developing a prototype of the solution
• Testing the developed solution products or services, Refining the solution based on
feedback from experts,instructors, and/or peers.
The evaluation will be based on weekly productivity and punctuality of the student, who will be
applying knowledge and skills towards solving the problem. The student would submit two
intermediate progress reports through the semester and a final report at the end. The reports
should be of high academic quality so that they can culminate in a research publication in a
well-reputed journal or conference in the chosen field of study.
The learning from the course would be student-centric, and could be tied to his/her readiness
for a career in the industry or higher academic research.
Course Outcomes (CO)
On completion of this course, the students will be able to,
CO1 Identify a problem of significance to the industry and the academic community, with
the help of mentor
CO2 Design the most effective solution to the problem, given the constraints and
challenges
CO3 Develop a prototype, that would be an embodiment of the proposed solution.
CO4 Present a technical report on the overall project.
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 257 | P age
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli
Course Outcome and Programme Outcome Mapping
0 1 2 1 2 3
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 1 1 O O O
O O O O O O O O O O O O S S S
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
CO1
3 3 3 _ 2 2 _ _ 2 2 2 2 3 _ 1
CO2
3 2 3 2 2 2 3 2 2 2 3 2 3 3 2
CO3
3 3 3 3 3 2 2 3 2 2 3 2 3 3 2
CO4
2 2 _ 3 3 2 3 3 3 3 3 2 3 3 3
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 258 | P age
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli
MINOR (MI) COURSES
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 259 | P age
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli