Course Code : ECOE10
Course Title : MICROWAVE INTEGRATED CIRCUITS
Number of Credits 3
Prerequisites : NONE
(Course code)
Course Type : OE
Course learning Objective
 To impart knowledge on basics of microwave electron beam devices and their applications
in X band frequency.
Course content
Design and realization of power dividers, hybrids, directional couplers etc using strip lines and micro
strip lines.
Filter design; Kuroda identities. K and J inverters. Filter transformations. Realization using strip lines
and micro strip lines.
Transistor amplifiers; Power gain equations. Stability considerations. Analysis. Design using MICs.
Transistor oscillators. Active devices for microwave oscillators. Three port S parameter
characterization of transistors. Oscillation and stability conditions.
Diode mixers. Mixer design. Single ended mixer. Balanced mixer. Image rejection mixer. Phase
shifter design. PIN diode. Phase shifter.
Text Books
1. I.J.Bahl & Bhartia, Microwave Solid State Circuit Design, Wiley, 1987.
2. G.D.Vendelin, Design of Amplifiers and Oscillators by the S Parameter Method, Wiley,
1982.
Reference Books
1. Stripline-like Transmission Lines for Microwave Integrated Circuits - Bharathi Bhat, Shiban
Koul, New Age International(P) Limited, Publishers, 2007
2. Microwave Engineering, David M Pozar, John Wiley & Sons, Inc International Student
Edition.
3. T.C.Edwards, Foundations for Microstrip Circuit Design (2/e), Wiley, 1992.
4. Recent literature in Microwave Integrated Circuit Design.
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able
CO1: the topics will make students design of the important and essential M.I.C components
CO2: Filter is the most needed circuit for many applications and the unit will make the student
confident in filter design
CO3: All aspects and different parameters, design factors and properties will me made thorough
CO4: One will be confident to handle any oscillator design
CO5: The student will become familiar and confident in the design of Mixers, the other essential
circuits.
77 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015