CE207 Geotechnical Engineering - I 3 0 0 3
CE207 GEOTECHNICAL ENGINEERING - I
Course objectives:
To explain what Geotechnical Engineering is and how it is important to civil engineering
To explain how three phase system is used in soil and how are soil properties estimated using
three phase system
To explain role of water in soil behavior and how soil stresses, permeability and quantity of
seepage including flow net are estimated
To determine shear parameters and stress changes in soil due to foundation loads
To estimate the magnitude and time-rate of settlement due to consolidation
Course Content
Historical development of Soil Engineering - Origin and general types of soils - soil structure, clay
minerals-Three phase system- Identification and Classification of soils
7
Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
Soil water - capillary phenomena - concept of effective and neutral stresses - Permeability -
determination of coefficient of permeability in the laboratory - Seepage flow - Head, gradient,
pressure - steady state flow - two dimensional - flow net.
Vertical stress distribution in soil - Boussinesq and Westergaard's equation - Newmark's influence
chart - principle, construction and use - Equivalent point load and other approximate methods -
pressure bulb. Compaction
Shear strength - Mohr-Coulomb failure criterion - shear strength tests - Different drainage
conditions - Shear properties of cohesionless and cohesive soils - Use of Mohr's circle - relationship
between principal stresses and shear parameters.
Compressibility and consolidation - Terzaghi's one dimensional consolidation theory - pressure
void ratio relationship - preconsolidation pressure - Total settlement and time rate of settlement -
coefficient of consolidation - curve fitting methods - Correction for construction time.
References
1. Gopal Ranjan and Rao, P. Basic and Applied Soil Mechanics, New Age International Pvt. Limited,
New Delhi, 2002.
2. Murthy, V.N.S., A text book of Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering, UBS Publishers
Distributors Ltd., New Delhi, 1999
3. Punmia, B.C. Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering, Laxmi Publications Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi,
1995.
4. Braja M. Das, Fundamentals of Geotechnical Engineering, Thomson Asia Pvt. Ltd., Singapore,
2005.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
carry out soil classification
solve three phase system problems
solve any practical problems related to soil stresses estimation, permeability and seepage
including flow net diagram
estimate the stresses under any system of foundation loads
solve practical problems related to consolidation settlement and time rate of settlement