Course Code : ECMI27
Course Title : FIBER OPTIC COMMUNICATION
Number of Credits 3
Prerequisites : ECMI12 & ECMI20
(Course code)
Course Type : MI
Course Learning Objective
 To expose the students to the basics of signal propagation through optical fibers, fiber
impairments, components and devices and system design.
Course Content
Optical Fibers: Structure, Wave guiding. Step-index and graded index optical fibers. Modal analysis.
Classification of modes. Single Mode Fibers.
Pulse dispersion. Material and waveguide dispersion. Polarization Mode Dispersion. Absorption,
scattering and bending losses. Dispersion Shifted Fibers, Dispersion Compensating Fibers.
Optical Power Launching and Coupling. Lensing schemes for coupling improvement. Fiber-to-fiber
joints. Splicing techniques. Optical fiber connectors.
Optical sources and detectors. Laser fundamentals. Semiconductor Laser basics. LEDs. PIN and
Avalanche photodiodes, Optical TX/RX Circuits.
Design considerations of fiber optic systems: Analog and digital modulation. Noise in detection
process. Bit error rate. Optical receiver operation. Power Budget and Rise time Budget. WDM.
Text Books
1. G.Keiser, “Optical Fiber Communications (5/e)”, McGraw Hill, 2013.
2. G.P.Agarwal, “Fiber Optic Communication Systems”, (3/e), Wiley, 2002.
Reference Books
1. M.M.K.Liu, “Principles and Applications of Optical Communications”, Tata McGraw Hill,
2010.
2. A.Ghatak & K.Thygarajan, “Introduction to Fiber Optics”, Cambridge, 1999.
3. J.Gowar, “Optical Communication Systems”, (2/e), PHI, 2001.
4. A.Selvarajan, S.Kar and T.Srinivas, “Optical Fiber Communication Principles and Systems”,
Tata McGraw Hill, 2002.
.
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able
CO1: Recognize and classify the structures of Optical fiber and types.
CO2: Discuss the channel impairments like losses and dispersion.
CO3: Analyze various coupling losses.
CO4: Classify the Optical sources and detectors and to discuss their principle.
CO5: Familiar with Design considerations of fiber optic systems.
119 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015