Course Code : MAIR32
Course Title : REAL ANALYSIS AND PROBABILITY THEORY
Number of Credits 4
Prerequisites : NONE
(Course code)
Course Type : GIR
Course Learning Objective
 To expose the students to the basics of real analysis and probability theory required for their
subsequent course work.
Course Content
Real Analysis: Real number system. Sets, relations and functions. Properties of real numbers.
sequences. Cauchy sequences. Bolzano-Weierstrass and Heine-Borel properties.
Reimann integral. Mean value theorems. Sequences and series of functions. Pointwise and
uniform convergence. Power series and Taylor series.
Probability Theory: Random Variable and random vectors - Distributions and densities. –
Functions of one and two random variables. Moments and characteristic functions.
Random processes - Strict sense and wide sense stationary processes - Covariance functions
and their properties - Spectral representation - Wiener-Khinchine theorem.
Gaussian processes – Poisson processes - Lowpass and Bandpass noise representations. .
Text Books
1. W.Rudin, “Introduction to Principles of Mathematical Analysis”, McGraw-Hill International
Editions, Third Edition, 1976.
2. Davenport,” Probability and Random Processes for Scientist and Engineers”, McGraw-Hill,
1970.
3. Papoulis. A.,” Probability, Random variables and Stochastic Processes”, McGraw Hill,
2002.
Reference Books
1. Kreyszig.E. “Advanced Engineering Mathematics”, John Wiley, 1999.
2. S.C. Malik, Savita Arora, “Mathematical Analysis”, New Age International Ltd, 4th Edition,
2012.
3. G.B.Gustafson & C.H. Wilcox, “Advanced Engineering Mathematics”, Springer Verlag,
1998.
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able
CO1: Develops an understanding for the construction of proofs and an appreciation for deductive
logic.
CO2: Explore the already familiar properties of the derivative and the Riemann Integral, set on a
more rigorous and formal footing which is central to avoiding inconsistencies in engineering
applications.
CO3: Explore new theoretical dimensions of uniform convergence, completeness and important
consequences as interchange of limit operations.
CO4: understand the concept of random processes and determine covariance and spectral density
of stationary random processes.
CO5: demonstrate the specific applications to Poisson and Gaussian processes and representation
of low pass and band pass noise models.
16 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015