HM404 Creative writing through literature 3 0 0 3
3
Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
SEMESTER III
HM404 CREATIVE WRITING THROUGH LITERATURE
Course objectives:
To motivate the students for creative writing
To familiarize them with literary Forms and Figures of speech
To expose them to the attractions and the challenges involved in creative writing
To emphasize the need for sustained effort at developing creativity
To enable them to write poems. Short stories, blogs, essays which can be published in
magazines or web journals
51
Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
Course Content
Understanding literary forms - Thinking about texts: Role-playing the Reader, the Author, and the
Individual as both the Reader-Author - Intensive reading of a poem, short story, a novel, a bestseller, a
film, a drama, an essay, a news story, an Ad-campaign, an Interview - Designing the individual reading
list. Pursuing one’s own competence.
Dissertation: Performance in the chosen genre.
References
1. Abrams, M.H. A Glossary of Literary Terms. (Seventh Edition). Thomson: New York. 1999.
2. Packard, William. The Poet’s Craft. Virago: New York. 2003.
3. Tuchman, Barbara. Practising History. Routledge: London, 2006.
4. Bowra, C.M. The Romantic Imagination.Faber: London. 1965.
5. Wallace, Irving. The Making of a Bestseller. Corgi: New York, 1984
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
apply various sources of creative writing like a museum, an Archive, the Library, the
newspaper, Film, the advertisement
demonstrate a variety of genres of Creative Literature like the Poem, the Novel, the Film, and
the image
demonstrate ideas like Postcolonialism, De-Colonizing the mind, working in white spaces,
Postmodernism, Existentialism
develop the language, methodology and vocabulary to read and criticize a poem, a film, a
novel, an advertisement
apply the methods of Creative thinkers and writers like S T Coleridge, Ngugi Wa Thiongo, Sri
Aurobindo, Vikram Chandra, Raja Rao, and Salman Rushdie
52