Course Code : ECPE40
Course Title : Nano Electronics
Number of Credits 3
Prerequisites (Course : NONE
code)
Course Type : PE
Course Objectives
 To present the state of the art in the areas of semiconductor device physics and
materials technology to enable nano-electronics
 To provide and overview of nano materials and device fabrication
 To discuss the extensive materials characterization techniques
Course Content
Overview: Nano devices, Nano materials, Nano characterization. Introduction to nano-electronics,
CMOS technology scaling issues, Design techniques for nanoscale transistors
MOS Electrical characterization, Non classical MOSFETs: overview and carrier transport in Nano-
MOSFETs, Silicon on Insulator (SOI) MOSFET
Metal-Semiconductor contacts and Metal-Source/Drain Junction MOSFETs, Germanium and
compound semiconductor Nano MOSFETs
Introduction to Nanomaterials, Quantum Mechanics and Quantum Statistics for considering
Nanomaterials.
Quantum mechanics and Quantum statistics for considering nanomaterials, synthesis/fabrication of
nanomaterials, chemical vapour deposition (CVD) and atomic layer deposition (ALD).
Characterization techniques for nanomaterials and nano structures – FTIR, XRD, AFM, SEM, TEM,
EDAX
NPTEL Link:
https://nptel.ac.in/courses/117108047
Text Books
1. Y. Taur and T. Ning, “Fundamentals of Modern VLSI Devices”, Cambridge University Press,
2nd Edition, 2013.
Reference Books
1. Plummer, Deal and Griffin, “Silicon VLSI Technology”, 1st edition, Pearson education, 2000.
2. Brundle, C. R., Evans, Charles A. jr., Wilson and Shaun, “Encyclopaedia of Materials
Characterization, 1992.
Course Outcomes:
At the end of the course, student will be able to
CO1: get an insight of nano devices and nano materials
CO2: learn the nano-micro fabrication
CO3: get a foundation for the device fabrication
CO4: study vast understanding to the device electronics for integrated circuits
CO5: get an insight of nano materials and its characterization techniques.
63 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015