Course Code : ECPE31
Course Title : FIBER OPTIC COMMUNICATION
Number of Credits 3
Prerequisites : ECPC12 &ECPC18
(Course code)
Course Type : PE
Course Learning Objective
 To expose the students to the basics of signal propagation through optical fibers, fiber
impairments, components, devices and system design.
Course Content
Optical Fibers: Structure, Wave guiding. Step-index and Graded index optical fibers. Modal analysis.
Classification of modes. Single Mode Fibers.
Pulse dispersion. Material and Waveguide dispersion. Polarization Mode Dispersion. Absorption,
scattering and bending losses. Dispersion Shifted Fibers, Dispersion Compensating Fibers.
Optical sources: LEDs and Laser Diodes. Optical Power Launching and Coupling. Source to Fiber
coupling, Fiber to Fiber joints. Misalignments. Schemes for coupling improvement.
Optical detectors: PIN and Avalanche photodiodes, Photo detector noise, Optical receivers. Digital
link design: Power budget and Rise time budget. Attenuation and Dispersion limit.
WDM Concepts. Optical Amplifiers: EDFA. Nonlinear effects: Self Phase Modulation, Nonlinear
Schrodinger Equation. Optical Soliton.
Text Books
1. G. Keiser, “Optical Fiber Communications (5/e)”, McGraw Hill, 2013.
2. A. Ghatak & K. Thygarajan, “Introduction to Fiber Optics”, Cambridge, 1999.
Reference Books
1. G. P. Agarwal, “Fiber Optic Communication Systems”, (4/e), Wiley, 2010.
2. M. M. K. Liu, “Principles and Applications of Optical Communications”, Tata McGraw Hill,
2010.
3. A. Selvarajan, S. Kar and T. Srinivas, “Optical Fiber Communication Principles and
Systems”, Tata McGraw Hill, 2006.
.
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able
CO1: Recognize and classify the structures of Optical fiber and types.
CO2: Discuss the channel impairments like losses and dispersion.
CO3: Classify the Optical sources and calculate various coupling losses.
CO4: Classify detectors and to design a fiber optic link.
CO5: Familiar with concepts of WDM, optical amplifiers and Soliton Propagation.
52 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015