Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
apply the concepts of composite construction in engineering
analyze the behaviour of shear connectors, degree of shear connection and their interaction
design composite beams under propped and un-propped condition
design different types of composite deck slabs
analyze the effects of temperature, shrinkage and creep and cyclic loading on composite
sections
CE464 GEOTECHNICAL EARTHQUAKE ENGINEERING
Course objectives:
To explain the mechanism of earthquake and its related causes to build structures and in-situ
soils
To explain how ground motion is recorded and how do quantify the earthquake intensity and
frequency related parameters
To explain how seismic site investigation will be done and seismic soil design parameters are
estimated
To explain how seismic resistant design of foundation will be done and also explain the concept
of liquefaction and related causes including codal recommendations
To explain how to do hazard assessment and mitigation and explain how do prepare a risk and
microzonation mapping
Course Content
Mechanism of Earthquakes - Causes of earthquake - Earthquake Fault sources - Elastic Rebound
theory - Seismic wave in Earthquake shaking - terminology - Locating an earthquake - Quantification of
earthquakes. Strong Motion Records -characteristics of ground motion - Factors influencing Ground
motion - Estimation of frequency content parameters
Seismic site investigations – Selected Case Studies - Evaluation of Dynamic soil properties – Codal
Provisions
Design Ground Motion - Developing Design Ground Motion-Codal recommendations.
Earthquake Resistant Design of foundation of buildings - Design considerations -. Earthquake
Response of slopes - Evaluation of slope stability - Liquefaction-Susceptibility - Liquefaction
Resistance-Codal recommendations.
Risk mapping - Hazard assessment – Mitigation measures - Seismic microzonation and its importance
References
1. Kameswara Rao, N.S.V., Dynamics soil tests and applications, Wheeler Publishing - New Delhi, 2000.
2. Krammer S.L., Geotechnical Earthquake Engineering, Prentice Hall, International Series, Pearson
Education (Singapore) Pvt. Ltd., 2004.
3. Kameswara Rao, Vibration Analysis and Foundation Dynamics, Wheeler
4. Robert W. Day, Geotechnical Earthquake Engineering Hand book, McGraw Hill, 2002
49