CE405 Irrigation and Hydraulic Structures 2 0 2 3
CE405 IRRIGATION AND HYDRAULIC STRUCTURES
Course Objectives:
To understand the basic types of irrigation, irrigation standards and crop water assessment
To study the different aspects of design of hydraulic structures
To provide knowledge on various hydraulic structures such as energy dissipaters, head and
cross regulators, canal falls and structures involved in cross drainage works
To understand the analysis of seepage and hydraulic jump
To design different types of dams
32
Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
Course Content
Irrigation - necessity - Types of irrigation - Methods of supplying water - Assessment of irrigation water
- Consumptive use and its determination - water requirement of various crops - Duty - Delta - Base
period and crop period.
Functions and components of a diversion head work - Function - selection of site - type of weirs on
pervious foundations - cause of failure - Bligh's creep theory and Khosla's theory - complete
design of a vertical drop weir.
Gravity dams - Non overflow section - forces acting - stability rules - elementary profile - Low and High
dams - drainage gallery - Construction joints - Earthen dams - stability of slopes by slip circle
method - seepage analysis and its control
Types of canals - canal alignment - Kennedy's silt theory - Lacey's silt theory - Design of canals
using the above theories - economical depth of cutting - canal losses - canal maintenance - lined
canals and their design - silt control measures.
Canal falls - Necessity and location - Design of sand type fall - design of a cross regulator - cross
drainage works - selection of suitable type of cross drainage work - canal outlets.
Note: Assignments include the design and drawings of various irrigation structures.
References
1. Punmia, B.C., Irrigation and Water Power Engineering, Standard Publishers, 2001.
2. Garg, S.K., Irrigation and Hydraulics Structures, Khanna Publishers, 1992.
3. Sharma, S.K., Principles and Practice of Irrigation Engg, S.Chand & Co, 1984.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
assess the irrigation needs of crops
design weirs on pervious foundation
design gravity dam and earthen dam
design the canal systems
select and design canal fall