Course Code : ECPE27
Course Title : MULTIMEDIA COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGY
Number of Credits 3
Prerequisites : ECPC15
(Course code)
Course Type : PE
Course learning Objective
 To made the students to understand various encoding and decoding techniques of audios
and videos in multimedia systems.
Course content
Components of multimedia system, Desirable features, Applications of multimedia systems,
Introduction to different types, Multimedia storage device.
Digital audio representation and processing-time domain and transform domain representations.
Coding standards, transmission and processing of digital audio. Musical instrument synthesizers.
Still image coding-JPEG. Discrete cosine Transform. Sequential and Progressive DCT based
encoding algorithms, lossless coding, and hierarchical coding. Basic concepts of discrete wavelet
transform coding and embedded image coding algorithms. Introduction to JPEG2000.
Feature of MPEG 1, structure of encoding and decoding process, MPEG 2 enhancements, and
different blocks of MPEG video encoder.
Content based video coding-overview of MPEG 4 video, motion estimation and compensation.
Different coding techniques and verification models. Block diagram of MPEG 4 video encoder and
decoder. An overview of H261 and H263 video coding techniques.
Text Books
1. Y.Q.Shi & H.Sun, Image and Video Compression for Multimedia Engineering, CRC Press,
2000.
2. S.V.Raghavan & S,K,Tripathi, Networked Multimedia Systems, Prentice-Hall,1998.
Reference Books
1. J.F.K.Buford, Multimedia Systems, Pearson, 2000.
2. Recent literature in Multimedia Communication Technology.
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able
CO1: analyze various components of the multimedia systems and its storage devices.
CO2: appreciate the different coding standards for the digital audio and musical synthesizers.
CO3: understand the various types of DCT based image encoding algorithms
CO4: understand the encoding and decoding process of the MPEG standards
CO5: analyze the different content based video processing techniques.
48 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015