Course Code : ICPE54
Course Title : Analytical Instrumentation
Type of Course : PE
Prerequisites : ICPC14, ICPC17
Contact Hours : 42 (3 credits)
Course Assessment : Continuous Assessment, End Assessment
Methods
Course Learning Objectives (CLO)
CLO1 To teach the students about the analysis of materials which is an important
requirement of process control and quality control in industry
CLO2 To expose the students to principles of various analytical methods.
CLO3 To impart knowledge on various spectroscopic instruments used in the analysis of
materials
CLO4 To introduce the concept of analytical instruments used in drug and pharmaceutical
lab
CLO5 To introduce different analytical instruments used in environmental pollution
monitoring
Course Content
Electromagnetic radiation and its interaction with matter – Beer's law – Spectral methods of
analysis – Absorption spectroscopy – Radiation sources – Monochromators – Filters – Prisms
– Diffraction gratings – Detectors – Choice of solvents. UV-Visible spectrometers – single-
beam and double-beam instruments.
Infrared spectrophotometer – IR sources – Cells – detectors – sample preparation. Analysis
using Attenuated Total Reflectance (ATR). Atomic absorption spectrometry (AAS) –
Wavelength choice – Sources – Cells – Detectors. Flame emission spectrometry. Atomic
fluorescence spectrometry.
X-ray spectroscopy – X-ray absorption methods – X-ray fluorescence methods – X-ray
diffraction. Radioactive measurement – Units of radioactivity – Application of radio-nuclides
in analysis – Radioactivity detectors. Nuclear magnetic Resonance (NMR) spectroscopy –
Basic principles – Continuous-wave NMR spectrometer – Pulsed Fourier Transform NMR
spectrometer – NMR applications.
Sampling – Sample collection for gas, liquid, and solid analysis. pH measurement – Basic
principles –Ion selective electrodes – Glass and reference electrodes – pH meter and its
calibration. Electrical conductivity measurement – Measuring circuit – Water and steam purity
measurement using electrical conductivity. Oxygen measurement – Paramagnetic oxygen
analyzers – Ceramic electrode for high temperature oxygen measurement – Dissolved
oxygen measurement.
Flue gas analysis for pollution control – Measurement of CO, carbon di-oxide, NOX and SOX,
dust and smoke measurement. Chromatography – Basic principles of liquid and gas
chromatography – Column details – Detectors for chromatography – Thermal conductivity
detector – Flame ionization detector – Flame photometric detector – Electron capture
detector – Effect of temperature programming – High pressure liquid chromatography (HPLC)
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 177 | P age
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli
References
1. Braun, Robert D., Introduction to Instrumental Analysis, Pharma Book Syndicate,
Hyderabad, 2nd Edition, 2012.
2. Ewing, G.W., Instrumental Methods of Analysis, McGraw Hill, Singapore, 5th Edition,
1992
3. Jain, R.K., Mechanical and Industrial Measurements, Khanna Publishers, Delhi, 1999.
4. Bela G. Liptak, Instrument Engineers' Handbook, Volume One: Process measurement
and analysis, CRC Press, 4th Edition, 2003.
5. Considine, D.M. Process/Industrial Instruments and Controls Handbook, McGraw Hill,
Singapore, 4th Edition, 1993.
6. Sherman, R.E. and Rhodes L.J., Analytical Instrumentation, ISA Press, New York,
1996.
7. Khandpur R.S, Handbook of Analytical Instruments, Tata McGraw Hills, 2nd Edn.2006
Course Outcomes (CO)
On completion of this course, the students will be able to,
CO1 Appreciate the relevance of material sampling and analysis in process control and
quality control in industry.
CO2 Understand the physical principles behind the various widely used analytical
methods in the industry.
CO3 Understand the important components and concepts of various spectroscopic
instruments and instruments used in drug and pharmaceutical lab and pollution
monitoring.
CO4 Select an appropriate analytical instrument for an industrial requirement.
Course Outcome and Programme Outcome Mapping
0 1 2 1 2 3
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 1 1 O O O
O O O O O O O O O O O O S S S
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
CO1 3 3 3 3 - - - - 2 2 2 3 3 3 -
CO2 3 3 3 3 - - - - 2 2 2 3 3 3 -
CO3 3 3 3 3 - - - - 2 2 2 3 3 3 -
CO4 3 3 3 3 - - - - 2 2 2 3 3 3 -
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 178 | P age
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli