Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
To understand behaviour of flexural members and the design laterally restrained and
unrestrained beams
To study the components of truss, loads on trusses, analysis and design of purlins and truss
members
To study the design of bolted and welded connections and arranging field visit to industries
Course Content
Introduction to steel structures and IS800-2007- Material specifications - Rolled sections – Section
classifications - Permissible stresses in tension, compression, bending and shear.
Compression members - Slenderness ratio – Design - Simple and built- up sections - lacings and
battens - Tension members.
Flexural members – Rolled sections - built-up beams - Design for strength and serviceability, web
crippling, web yielding, bearing stiffeners.
Roof trusses - components - Loads - Design of purlins using channel and angle sections, and truss
members - End connections at the supports.
Bolted connections - types of bolts - Resistance of bolted connections under various failure modes –
design of beam splice, seated shear connections at the supports.
Welded connections - types - strength of welds - design of fillet and butt welds - shear and moment
resistant joints - design and detailing of connections.
Note: Assignments include the design and drawings of various steel structural elements.
References
1. Subramanian N, Design of Steel Structures, Oxford University Press, New Delhi 2008.
2. Dayaratnam P, Design of Steel Structures, S. Chand & Co., New Delhi, 2003.
3. Arya, A.S and Ajmani, A.L., Design of Steel Structures, Nemchand and brothers, Roorkee, 1992..
4. Punmia, B.C., Ashok Kumar Jain and Arun Kumar Jain. Comprehensive Design of Steel Structures,
Laxmi Publications Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi 2000.
5. IS 800-2007, Code of practice for general construction in steel, Bureau of Indian Standards, New
Delhi.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
apply the IS code of practice for the design of steel structural elements
design compression and tension members using simple and built-up sections
calculate forces on the various members of the truss and design them
analyze the behavior of bolted connections and design them
design welded connections for both axial and eccentric forces
CE309 HYDRAULIC MACHINERY
Course objectives:
To understand the application of momentum principle of impact of jets on plane and curved
surfaces
21
Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
To study types of centrifugal Pumps, work done and efficiency of the different types centrifugal
pumps and also study about performance of pumps & characteristic curves
To study about specific speed and performance characteristics of different types of turbines
To study about hydroelectric power plant and estimation of hydropower potential
To explain the concept of positive displacement
Course Content
Principles of impingement of jets - Impact of jet on a stationary vertical plate, stationary inclined plate,
stationary curved plate, hinged plate, moving vertical and inclined plates, moving curved plate and on
series of moving flat and curved vanes fixed on the periphery of circular rim.
Turbines - classification- impulse turbines - Pelton wheel - Reaction turbines - Francis and Kaplan
Turbines - draft tubes - Governing of a Francis turbine - Performance of turbines - specific speed and
their significance.
Centrifugal pump - description and working - Head, discharge and efficiency of a centrifugal pump -
pressure rise in the pump - minimum starting speed of a pump - cavitation - priming - multistage
pumps - characteristic curves.
Reciprocating pump - Description and working - types - discharge and slip - power required to
drive the pump - Indicator diagram - Air vessel - work done against friction with and without air
vessels.
Working principle and use of the following hydraulic pumps and machines - Deep well pumps -
submersible and jet pumps, special pumps - Gear pump - screw pump, sewage pump, miscellaneous
machines - Hydraulic press - hydraulic accumulator - Hydraulic ram.
References
1. Bansal, R.K., A text book of Fluid Mechanics and Hydraulic Machines, Laxmi Publications (P) Ltd.,
New Delhi, 2002.
2. Nagaratnam, S., Fluid Machines and Systems, Tata McGraw Hill, 1989.
3. Khurmi, R.S., Text Book of Hydraulics and Hydraulic Machine, S. Chand & Co, 2003.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
calculate forces and work done by a jet on fixed or moving plate and curved plates
apply the working principles of Impulse and Reaction turbines
select the type of turbine required with reference to available head of water and discharge
determine the characteristics of centrifugal pump
apply the working principles of the Reciprocating pump
CE311 ADVANCED STRENGTH OF MATERIALS
Course objectives:
To understand the mechanical properties of materials
To understand the different theories of failure for brittle and ductile materials
To know the features of unsymmetrical bending and different methods of analysis
To understand the concept of shear centre and to know different methods for its location
To know the fundamentals of vibration of structure
22
Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
Course Content
Mechanical Properties of Materials - Stress-Strain Diagrams- Elastic and Plastic Deformation - Brittle
and Ductile Failures of Materials - Mechanical Tests like Surface Hardness, Fatigue, Creep etc.
Principal stresses in a 3D field.- Computation -Mohr's Circle - Lame's Ellipsoid. Theories of failure -
Criteria for Failure - Different failure theories for ductile and brittle materials. Equivalent bending and
twisting moments.
Unsymmetrical bending- Properties of unsymmetrical sections- Circle of inertia - Dyadic circle -
Momental ellipse- Stresses and deflection due to unsymmetrical bending - Concept and relevance of Z
polygon.
Shear Centre - Concept and significance - Shear flow for thin walled open sections-Location of shear
centre for singly symmetric sections. Stresses in curved flexural members-Winkler Bach Formula -
Crane hooks - rings and links.
Fundamentals of vibration - free vibration of single degree of freedom systems - Undamped and
damped free vibration with different types of damping.- Resonance-Harmonic response of single
degree of freedom systems with and without damping.
References
1. Srinath, L. S., Advanced Mechanics of Solids , Tata McGraw Hill,1980.
2. Kazimi, S.M.A., Solid Mechanics, Tata McGraw Hill, 1976.
3. Punmia, B.C., Strength of Materials Part II, Standard Publishers and Distributors, 1991.
4. Shames I.H., Engineering Mechanics, Prentice Hall of India,1996
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
determine the important mechanical properties of materials
demonstrate the different theories of failure for brittle and ductile materials
apply the different methods of unsymmetrical bending analysis
demonstrate the significance and concept of shear centre
apply the principles of structural dynamics
CE313 FLUID MECHANICS LAB
Course objectives:
To understand the flow measurement in a pipe flow
To determine the energy loss in pipe flow
To study the characteristics of turbines
To study the characteristics of pumps
To measure the discharge in a open channel flow
Course Content
1. Determination of pipe friction
2. Calibration of flow meters - Venturimeter and Orifice meter
3. Determination of discharge coefficients for notches
4. Determination of minor losses
23
Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
Introduction to Plastic analysis – ductility – plastic bending of beams – stages of bending – shape factor
– plastic hinge – load factor – failure mechanism - upper and lower bound theorems of plastic analysis
– collapse load for beams and frames.
Note: Assignments include the design and drawings of various steel structures.
References
1. Subramanian N, Design of Steel Structures, Oxford University Press, New Delhi 2008.
2. Bhavikatti, S.S., Design of Steel Structures, I.K. International Publishing House Pvt. Ltd., New
Delhi, 2010
3. Krishnaraju.N, Structural Design and Drawing, University Press, Hyderabad, 2009.
4. IS 800-2007, Code of practice for general construction in steel, Bureau of Indian Standards, New
Delhi.
5. IS875 Part (3) - 1987, Code of Practice for Design Loads (other than earthquake) for buildings and
structures: Wind loads., Bureau of Indian Standards, New Delhi.
6. SP6 (1)-1964, IS hand book for structural Engineers. Bureau of Indian Standards, New Delhi.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
calculate shape factor and plastic moment capacity
design eccentrically loaded compression members (Beam-Columns) and their base plates
design welded plate girder and other components and Gantry girder
carry out wind load calculations for tall structures and design of steel chimneys
design light gauge steel sections
CE310 WATER RESOURCES ENGINEERING
Course Objectives:
To build on the student’s background in hydrology and hydraulics and understanding of water
resources systems
To develop the skills in modeling of flood flows and flood routing
To develop skills in the ground water flow, type of aquifer and yield from the well
To provide the knowledge of design of reservoir, operation and sedimentation
To study the effect, causes and remedial measures of water logging
Course Content
Hydrologic cycle - rainfall and its measurement - computation of mean rainfall over a catchment area
using arithmetic mean, Theissen polygon and Isohyetal methods - Runoff -infiltration indices - Storm
Hydrograph and unit hydrograph
River regions and their characteristics - classification of rivers on alluvial plains - meandering of rivers -
river training
Reservoir planning - Investigations - zones of storage in a reservoir - single purpose and multipurpose
reservoir - determination of storage capacity and yield - reservoir sedimentation - Reservoir life -
Sediment prevention - Flood estimation- Flood forecasting - Flood routing
28
Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
Ground water - types of aquifers - storage coefficient - coefficient of transmissibility - steady radial flow
into a well located in an unconfined and confined aquifers - Tube wells and Open wells - yield from an
open well.
Water logging - causes and effects of water logging - remedial measures - land reclamation - land
drainage - benefits - classification of drains - surface drains - subsurface drains - design principles and
maintenance of drainage systems.
References
1. Punmia, B.C., Irrigation and Water Power Engineering, Standard Publishers, 2001.
2. Ragunath. H.M., Hydrology, Willey Eastern Limited, New Delhi, 2000.
3. Subramanya, Engineering Hydrology, Tata-McGraw Hill, 2004.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
design various channel systems
design head and cross regulator structures
identify various types of reservoir and their design aspects
By the Establishes the understanding of cross drainage works and its design
design different types of dams
CE312 COMPUTER AIDED DESIGN – I
Course objectives:
To learn the programming of numerical methods
To use the computer to apply numerical techniques
To learn the fundamentals of Computer Aided Drafting
To understand DBMS concepts
To learn the handling of spreadsheets
Course Content
Application Programs
a. Roots of an equation using Newton - Raphson method.
b. Solution of linear simultaneous equations using Gauss elimination.
c. Matrix inversion using Gauss Jordan method
d. Linear regression line of given points
e. Curve fitting using Polynomial Regression
f. Eigen value extraction using Power method
Standard packages to solve the above problems-Solution of Linear Programming problems using
standard software-Basic 2D objects - line, polyline, circle, ellipse - editing objects - trim, break, change,
stretch - dimensioning - preparation of plan, elevation and section drawings of simple structural objects
- printing and plotting drawings - script files - introduction to 3D
DBMS concepts - Civil Engineering Databases - Manipulation - Spreadsheet concepts - Worksheet
calculations in Civil Engineering - Regression, Matrix Inversion, etc.
29