Course Code : ECPE41
Course Title : ELECTRONIC DESIGN AUTOMATION TOOLS
Number of Credits 3
Prerequisites : NONE
(Course code)
Course Type : HO
Course learning Objective
 To make the students exposed to Front end and Back end VLSI CAD tools.
Course content
OS Architecture: System settings and configuration. Introduction to UNIX commandsHandling
directories, Filters and Piping, Wildcards and Regular expression, Power Filters and Files Redirection.
Working on Vi editor, Basic Shell Programming, TCL Scripting language.
Algorithms in VLSI: Partitioning methods: K-L, FM, and Simulated annealing algorithms. Placement
and Routing algorithms, Interconnects and delay estimation.
Synthesis and simulation using HDLs-Logic synthesis using Verilog. Memory and FSM synthesis.
Performance driven synthesis, Simulation- Types of simulation. Static timing analysis. Formal
verification. Switch level and transistor level simulation.
System Verilog- Introduction, Design hierarchy, Data types, Operators and language constructs.
Functional coverage, Assertions, Interfaces and test bench structures.
Analog/Mixed Signal Modelling and Verification: Analog/ Mixed signal modelling using Verilog-A
and Verilog-AMS. Event Driven Modelling: Real number modelling of Analog/Mixed blocks
modelling using Verilog-RNM/System Verilog. Analog/Digital Boundary Issues: boundary issues
coverage
Text Books
1. M.J.S.Smith, “Application Specific Integrated Circuits”, Pearson, 2008.
2. S.Sutherland, S. Davidmann, P. Flake, “System Verilog for Design”, (2/e), Springer, 2006.
Reference Books
1. H.Gerez, “Algorithms for VLSI Design Automation”, John Wiley, 1999
2. Z. Dr Mark, “Digital System Design with System Verilog “, Pearson, 2010.
3. Recent literature in Electronic Design Automation Tools.
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able
CO1: execute the special features of VLSI back end and front end CAD tools and UNIX shell script
CO2: explain the algorithms used for ASIC construction
CO3: design synthesizable Verilog and VHDL code.
CO4: explain the difference between Verilog and system Verilog and are able to write system Verilog
code.
CO5: Model Analog and Mixed signal blocks using Verilog A and Verilog AMS
64 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015