Course Code : ECMI20
Course Title : ANALOG COMMUNICATION
Number of Credits 3
Prerequisites : ECMI10
(Course code)
Course Type : MI
Course Learning Objective
 To develop a fundamental understanding on Communication Systems with emphasis on
analog modulation techniques and noise performance.
Course Content
Basic blocks of Communication System. Amplitude (Linear) Modulation – AM, DSB-SC, SSB-SC
and VSB-SC. Methods of generation and detection. FDM. Super Heterodyne Receivers.
Angle (Non-Linear) Modulation - Frequency and Phase modulation. Transmission Bandwidth of FM
signals, Methods of generation and detection. FM Stereo Multiplexing.
Noise - Internal and External Noise, Noise Calculation, Noise Figure. Noise in linear and nonlinear
AM receivers, Threshold effect.
Noise in FM receivers, Threshold effect, Capture effect, FM Threshold reduction, Pre-emphasis and
De-emphasis.
Pulse Modulation techniques – Sampling Process, PAM, PWM and PPM concepts, Methods of
generation and detection. TDM. Noise performance.
Text Books
1. S.Haykins, Communication Systems, Wiley, (4/e), Reprint 2009.
2. Kennedy, Davis, Electronic Communication Systems (4/e), McGraw Hill, Reprint 2008.
Reference Books
1. B.Carlson, Introduction to Communication Systems, McGraw-Hill, (4/e), 2009.
2. J.Smith, Modern Communication Circuits (2/e), McGraw Hill, 1997.
3. J.S.Beasley&G.M.Miler, Modern Electronic Communication (9/e), Prentice-Hall, 2008.
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able
CO1: Understand the basics of communication system and analog modulation techniques
CO2: Apply the basic knowledge of signals and systems and understand the concept of Frequency
modulation.
CO3: Apply the basic knowledge of electronic circuits and understand the effect of Noise in
communication system and noise performance of AM system
CO4: Understand the effect of noise performance of FM system.
CO5: Understand TDM and Pulse Modulation techniques.
112 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015