Course Code : ECPE30
Course Title : MICROWAVE COMPONENTS AND CIRCUITS
Number of Credits 3
Prerequisites : ECPC16
(Course code)
Course Type : PE
Course Learning Objective
 The subject introduces the essential Microwave Circuit Theory and the design aspects of
Microwave Integrated Circuit components.
Course Content
Scattering matrix formulation. Passive microwave devices; terminations, bends, corners, attenuators,
phase changers, directional couplers and hybrid junctions. Basics and design considerations of
Microstrip line, strip line, coplanar waveguide, Slot line and Fin line.
Microwave measurements; frequency, wavelength, VSWR. Impedance determination. S-parameter
measurements. Network analyzer.
Microwave network parameters. Basic circuit elements for microwaves. Transmission line sections
and stubs. Richard transformation. Kuroda identities.
MIC filter design. Low pass to high pass, band pass and band stop transformations. Realization using
micro strip lines and strip lines.
Design and realization of MIC components.3 dB hybrid design. Rat race Hybrid Ring, Backward wave
directional coupler, power divider; realization using micro strip lines and strip lines.
Text Books
1. I.J.Bahl & P.Bhartia, “Microwave Solid state Circuit Design”, Wiley, 2003.
2. D.M.Pozar, “Microwave Engineering (2/e)”, Wiley, 2004.
Reference Books
1. A. Das, “Microwave Engineering”, Tata McGraw Hill, 2000
2. B.Bhat, S. K. Koul,”Stripline like transmission lines for Microwave Integrated Circuits”, New
age International Pvt.Ltd. Publishers 2007.
3. G. Matthaei, E.M.T. Jones , L. Young , George Matthaei, Leo Young , George L. Matthaei
“Microwave filters, Impedance Matching Network, Coupling Structures
(Updated)”,Hardcover, 1,096 Pages, Published 1980 by Artech House Publishers ISBN-13:
978-0-89006-099-5, ISBN: 0-89006-099-1
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able
CO1: Learn the basics of S parameters and use them in describing the components
CO2: Expose to the Microwave Measurements Principle
CO3: Realize the importance of the theory of Microwave circuit theory.
CO4: Work out the complete design aspects of various M.I.C. Filters
CO5: Confidently design all M.I.C. components to meet the industry standard
51 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015
.