Course Code : ICPE62
Course Title : Sensor Interface Design
Type of Course : PE
Prerequisites : ICPC11, ICPC12, ICPC17
Contact Hours : 42 (3 credits)
Course Assessment Methods : Continuous Assessment, End Assessment
Course Learning Objectives (CLO)
CLO1 To impart expertise in designing analog signal conditioning circuits tailored for
resistive, capacitive, inductive, and piezoelectric sensors with the aim of enhancing
their performance characteristics.
CLO2 To offer knowledge regarding the design of transmitters adhering to industrial
standards.
CLO3 To provide understanding of data acquisition system design and tackle associated
challenges.
CLO4 To provide knowledge about the modern digital interface, direct microcontroller
interface and universal interface for sensors.
Course Content
Design of analog signal conditioning circuits for resistive, capacitive, inductive, and
piezoelectric sensors to enhance linearity, sensitivity, resolution, and meet specific
performance criteria using a practical hardware-based approach. Advanced electronic
instrumentation for temperature compensation, power dissipation, addressing self-heating
errors, managing current limits, evaluating circuit range and dynamic response. Noise
analysis of interface circuits. Real-world case studies and hands-on experiences in analog
interface design for temperature, pressure, and displacement sensors applied in industrial
settings.
Review of transmitter technologies: designing two-wire, three-wire, and four-wire transmitters
with analog electronic circuits and integrated circuits (ICs). Developing interface circuits for
lead resistance compensation and precise 4-terminal low-resistance measurements.
Introduction to data acquisition system, A/D conversion, issues related to interfacing of static
and dynamic sensors.
Smart sensors and digital sensor system design, Basic of digital interfacing circuits for
resistive, capacitive and inductive sensors. Digitizer design based on dual slope integrator
for resistance to digital converter (RDC) and capacitance to digital converters (CDC).
Addressing power dissipation, mitigating self-heating errors, managing current limits, and
dynamic response of circuits. Case studies and hands-on for digital interface for sensors for
industrial applications.
Modern digital interfacing circuit based on switched capacitor (SC) and sigma-delta
modulators. Case studies and hands-on for designing digital interface for gas sensors and
meteorological parameters.
Direct microcontroller interface (DMI) for resistive and capacitive transducers: design and
practical implementation. Universal frequency to digital converter, universal sensors and
transducer interface- features and performance, Using GPIO pins for digital interface for
sensors, future trends in sensor circuit design, Case studies and hands-on for interfacing
biomedical sensors with microcontrollers.
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 193 | P age
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli
References
1. Ramon Pallas-Areny, John G. Webster, Sensors and Signal Conditioning, 2/e, Wiley
India, 2012.
2. Daniel H. Sheingold, Transducer Interfacing Handbook, Analog Devices, 1980.
3. Walt Kester, Practical Design Techniques for Sensor Signal Conditioning, Analog
Devices, 1999.
4. Walt Kester, Practical Analog Design Techniques, Analog Devices, 1995.
5. Daniel H. Sheingold, Analog-Digital Conversion handbook, Analog Devices, 1986.
6. Ferran Reverter, Ramon Pallas-Areny, Direct Sensor-to-Microcontroller
Interface Circuits: Design and Characterization, Marcombo, 2005.
7. Sergio Franco, Design with Operational Amplifiers and Analog Integrated Circuits, 4/e,
TMH, 2016.
8. William D. Stanley, Operational Amplifiers with Linear Integrated Circuits, 6/e, Pearson
Education, 2004.
9. Paul Horowitz and Winfield Hill, The art of electronics. 2/e. Cambridge University Press,
2006.
10. James W. Dally (Author), William F. Riley (Author), Kenneth G. Mcconnell,
Instrumentation for Engineering Measurements, 2/e, Wiley India, 2010
11. John P Bentley, Principles of Measurement Systems, 4/e Pearson Pentice Hall, 2005
12. Ernest O. Doebelin (Author), Dhanesh N. Manik, Measurement Systems, 7/e, McGraw-
Hill, 2019
13. William C. Dunn, Introduction to Instrumentation, Sensors, and Process Control,
Artech House, 2005.
14. Jacob Fraden, Handbook of Modern Sensors: Physics, Designs, and Applications,
Springer, 1993.
15. H.R. Taylor, Data Acquisition for Sensor Systems, Springer, 2010.
Course Outcomes (CO)
On completion of this course, the students will be able to,
CO1 Design electronic interface circuits for resistive, capacitive, inductive, and
piezoelectric sensors.
CO2 Design analog electronic circuits and integrated circuits-based transmitters for
specified physical parameters.
CO3 Design digital interface circuits for resistive and capacitive sensors.
CO4 Design direct microcontroller interface for resistive and capacitive transducers.
Course Outcome and Programme Outcome Mapping
0 1 2 1 2 3
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 1 1 O O O
O O O O O O O O O O O O S S S
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
CO1 3 3 3 3 3 - - - 2 1 2 2 3 3 -
CO2 3 3 3 3 3 - - - 2 2 2 2 2 3 -
CO3 3 3 3 3 3 - - - 1 2 2 3 3 3 -
CO4 2 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 3 3 3 2 2 2 1
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 194 | P age
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli