Course Code : ECPC13
Course Title : SEMICONDUCTOR PHYSICS AND DEVICES
Number of Credits 4
Prerequisites : NONE
(Course code)
Course Type : PC
Course Learning Objectives
 To make the students understand the fundamentals of electronic devices.
 To train them to apply these devices in mostly used and important applications.
Course Content
Semiconductor materials: crystal growth, film formation, lithography, etching and doping. Formation
of energy bands in solids, Concept of hole, Intrinsic and extrinsic semiconductors, conductivity,
Equilibrium Carrier concentration, Density of states and Fermi level, Carrier transport – Drift and
Diffusion, continuity equation, Hall effect and its applications.
P-N junction diodes, Energy band diagram, biasing, V-I characteristics, capacitances. Diode models,
Break down Mechanisms, Rectifiers, Limiting and Clamping Circuits, types of diodes.
BJT Physics and Characteristics modes of operation, Ebers-Moll Model, BJT as a switch and
Amplifier, breakdown mechanisms, Photo devices.
MOSFET: Ideal I-V characteristics, non-ideal I-V effects, MOS Capacitor, MOSFET as switch,
CMOS Logic gate Circuits, Bi-CMOS circuits, CCDs.
State-of-the-art MOS technology: small-geometry effects, FinFETs, Ultrathin body FETs. Display
devices, Operation of LCDs, Plasma, LED and HDTV
Text Books
1. S.M.Sze, Semiconductors Devices, Physics and Technology, (2/e), Wiley, 2002
2. A.S.Sedra & K.C.Smith, Microelectronic Circuits (5/e), Oxford, 2004
Reference Books
1. L.Macdonald & A.C.Lowe, Display Systems, Wiley, 2003
2. Robert Pierret, “Semiconductor Device Fundamentals,” Pearson Education, 2006
3. J.Millman and C.C.Halkias: Electronic devices and Circuits, McGraw Hill, 1976.
4. B.G.Streetman: Solid state devices, (4/e), PHI, 1995.
5. N.H.E.Weste, D. Harris, “CMOS VLSI Design (3/e)”, Pearson, 2005.
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able
CO1: Apply the knowledge of basic semiconductor material physics and understand fabrication
processes.
CO2: Analyze the characteristics of various electronic devices like diode, transistor etc.,
CO3: Classify and analyze the various circuit configurations of Transistor and MOSFETs.
CO4: Illustrate the qualitative knowledge of Power electronic Devices.
CO5: Become Aware of the latest technological changes in Display Devices.
20 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015