Course Code : ICPE42
Course Title : Control System Components
Type of Course : PE
Prerequisites : ICPC11, ICPC12
Contact Hours : 42 (3 credits)
Course Assessment Methods : Continuous Assessment, End Assessment
Course Learning Objectives (CLO)
CLO1 To expose the students to various electrical components used in industrial control
systems.
CLO2 To expose the students to various mechanical components used in industrial control
systems
CLO3 To teach various mechanical and pneumatic systems used in industrial control
systems.
CLO4 To introduce the concept of hydraulic pumps, actuators and valves.
Course Content
Motors: Types, working principle, characteristic, and mathematical model of following: Motors
AC/DC motors, Brushless DC motor, stepper, servo, linear, Synchronous, Generators, and
Alternator
Types, working principle, characteristics, and symbolic representation of following: Switches:
Toggle, Slide, DIP, Rotary, Thumbwheel, Selector, Limit, Proximity, Combinational switches,
zero speed, belt sway, pull cord. Relays: Electromechanical, Solid state relays, relay
packages. Contactors: Comparison between relay and contactor, contactor size and ratings.
Timers: On Delay, off delay and Retentive.
Sequencing and Interlocking for motors: Concept of sequencing and Interlocking, Standard
symbols used for Electrical Wiring Diagram, Electrical Wiring diagrams for Starting, Stopping,
Emergency shutdown, (Direct on line, star delta, soft starter) Protection devices for motors:
Short circuit protection, Over load Protection, Over/ under voltage protection, Phase reversal
Protection, high temperature and high current Protection, over speed, Reversing direction of
rotation, Braking, Starting with variable speeds, Jogging/Inching Motor Control Center:
Concept and wiring diagrams
Pneumatic components: Pneumatic Power Supply and its components: Pneumatic relay
(Bleed and Non- bleed, Reverse and direct), Single acting and Double acting cylinder, Special
cylinders: Cushion, Double rod, Tandem, Multiple position, Rotary Filter Regulator Lubricator
(FRL), Pneumatic valves (direction- controlled valves, flow control etc.), Special types of
valves like relief valve, pressure reducing etc. Hydraulic components: Hydraulic supply,
Hydraulic pumps, Actuators (cylinder and motor), Hydraulic valves
References
1. M. D. Desai, Control System Components, PHI, 2008.
2. J. E. Gibson and F. B. Tuteur, Control system components, McGraw Hill, 2013
3. S. R. Majumdhar, Pneumatic Systems, Tata McGraw-Hill Publisher, 2009.
4. Meixner H and Sauer E, Intro to Electro-Pneumatics, Festo didactic, 1st Edition, 1989.
5. Hasebrink J P and Kobler R, Fundamentals of Pneumatic Control Engineering,
FestoDidactic: Esslinger (W Germany), 1989.
6. Petruzella, Industrial Electronics, McGraw-Hill International 1st Edition, 1996.
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 153 | P age
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli
Course Outcomes (CO)
On completion of this course, the students will be able to,
CO1 Select and use of different process control components for electrical systems.
CO2 Select and use of different process control components for mechanical system.
CO3 Identify, formulate and solve a problem using pneumatic system in
instrumentation and control engineering.
CO4 Identify, formulate and solve a problem using hydraulic system in
instrumentation and control engineering.
Course Outcome and Programme Outcome Mapping
0 1 2 1 2 3
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 1 1 O O O
O O O O O O O O O O O O S S S
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
CO1 2 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 3 3 3 2 2 2 1
CO2 3 3 3 3 3 - - - 2 2 2 3 3 3 -
CO3 3 3 3 3 3 - - - 2 2 2 3 3 3 -
CO4 3 3 3 3 3 - - - 2 2 2 3 3 3 -
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 154 | P age
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli