Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
CE305 CONCRETE STRUCTURES – I
Course objectives:
To study the stress strain behavior of steel and concrete
To understand the concept of working stress and limit state methods
To gain the knowledge of limit state design for flexure, shear, torsion, bond and anchorage
To understand the behavior of columns subjected to eccentric load and use of interaction
diagrams
To study the design of various foundation
Course Content
Stress strain behavior of steel and concrete- Introduction to working stress method - permissible
stresses. Limit state method-Limit states - Characteristic strength and load - Partial safety factor -
Design of singly and doubly reinforced beams, T and L beams - Design for Shear and Torsion. Slabs -
one way and two way slabs for different edge conditions - Yield line theory - Flat slab -
continuous slabs - stair cases - different types. Columns - axially loaded and eccentrically loaded
columns - Interaction Diagrams. Footings - isolated footings - square, rectangular and circular footings
- Combined footing Pile and pile cap- Introduction to masonry structures.
Note: Assignments include the design and drawings of various R.C.C structural elements.
References
1. Ashok, Kumar Jain, Reinforced Concrete Limit State Design, Nem Chand Brothers, 1990.
2. Sinha. S.N. Reinforced Concrete Design, Tata McGraw Hill, 2002.
3. Varghese, Limit state design of concrete, Oxford IBH, 2000.
4. IS456-2000 Code of practice for Plain and reinforced concrete code of practice.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
apply the fundamental concepts of working stress method and limit state method
use IS code of practice for the design of concrete elements
design the beams, slab, stairs, column and footing
draw various RCC structural elements
design masonry structures
CE307 STEEL STRUCTURES-I
Course objectives:
To learn IS 800-2007 code of practice for the design of Compression, Tension and Flexural
members using various cross-sections
To study the behaviour and design of compression and tension members using simple and
built-up sections
20