Course Code : ECHO12
Course Title : DETECTION AND ESTIMATION
Number of Credits 3
Prerequisites : MAIR 45
(Course code)
Course Type : HO
Course learning Objective
 The objective of this course is to make the students conversant with those aspects of
statistical decision and estimation which are indispensable tools required for the optimal
design of digital communication systems.
Course content
Binary hypothesis testing; Bayes, minimax and Neyman-Pearson tests. Composite hypothesis testing.
Signal detection in discrete time: Models and detector structures. Coherent detection in independent
noise. Detection in Gaussian noise. Detection of signals with random parameters. Detection of
stochastic signals. Performance evaluation of signal detection procedures.
Bayesian parameter estimation; MMSE, MMAE and MAP estimates. Nonrandom parameter
estimation. Exponential families. Completeness theorem. ML estimation. Information inequality.
Asymptotic properties of MLEs.
Discrete time Kalman- Bucy filter. Linear estimation. Orthogonality principle. Wiener- Kolmogorov
filtering – causal and non-causal filters.
Signal detection in continuous time: Detection of deterministic signals in Gaussian noise. Coherent
detection in white Gaussian noise.
TextBooks
1. H.V.Poor, “An Introduction to Signal Detection and Estimation (2/e) Springer”, 1994.
2. B.C.Levy, “Principles of Signal Detection and Parameter Estimation”, Springer, 2008.
ReferenceBooks
1. H.L.Vantrees, “Detection, Estimation and Modulation theory”, Part I, Wiley, 1987.
2. M.D.Srinath & P.K.Rajasekaran, “Statistical Signal Processing with Applications”, Wiley,
1979.
3. J.C.Hancock & P.A. Wintz, “Signal Detection Theory”, Mc-Graw Hill, 1966.
4. Recent literature in Detection and Estimation.
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able
CO1: summarize the fundamental concept on Statistical Decision Theory and
Hypothesis Testing
CO2: summarize the various signal estimation techniques with additive noise
CO3: summarizer with Bayesian parameter estimation (minimum mean square error (MMSE),
minimum mean absolute error (MMAE), maximum a-posterior probability (MAP) estimation
methods).
CO4: compare optimal filtering, linear estimation, and Wiener/Kalman filtering.
CO5: construct Wiener and Kalman filters (time discrete) and state space models.
130 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015