Course Code : ECOE21
Course Title : COMPUTER VISION AND MACHINE LEARNING
Number of Credits 3
Prerequisites : NONE
(Course code)
Course Type : OE
Course Learning Objectives
 Be familiar with the theoretical aspects of computing with images;
 Describe the foundation of image formation, measurement, and analysis;
Course Content
Computer Vision and Computer Graphics, Computer Vision - Low-level, Mid-level, High-level,
Diverse Computer Vision Applications: Document Image Analysis, Biometrics, Object Recognition,
Tracking, Medical Image Analysis, Content-Based Image Retrieval, Video Data Processing.
Segmentation -Object Recognition, Activity Recognition, and Gesture Recognition - Image features:
Colour, Shape, Texture Shape orientation descriptors – SIFT, SURF, Viola Jones Feature detectors,
Harris. Integral Histogram.
Adaboost: concept of ensemble of classifiers; basic algorithm; case study- Face detection Artificial
Immune Systems Fuzzy belief networks, Evolving belief networks Bayesian belief networks
Evolutionary and swarm-based neural networks.
Machine learning: classification, Machine learning: clustering, Machine learning: classification.
Logistic regression Bayesian logistic regression Non-linear logistic regression Dual logistic regression
Kernel logistic regression, Incremental fitting and boosting.
Reinforcement learning - Classification trees- Multi-class logistic regression Random trees, Random
forests, Applications. Introduction to Deep Learning.
Text Books
1. Richard Szeliski, “Computer Vision: Algorithms and Applications”, Springer, 2010.
2. D. Forsyth and J. Ponce,”Computer Vision - A modern approach”, Prentice Hall, 2002.
Reference Books
1. Richard Hartley and Andrew Zisser man, Multiple view geometry in computer vision 2nd
edition, Cambridge University press, 2004.
2. E Davies, “Computer and Machine Vision, Algorithms, Practicalities”, 4th Edition, Elsevier,
2012.
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able
CO1: learn the basics of computer vision.
CO2: learn the vision features.
CO3: understand issue of segmentation in computer vision algorithms.
CO4: study the basics of Machine learning.
CO5: know the design of Deep learning architectures.
90 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015