Course Code : ECPE24
Course Title : INTERNET OF THINGS
Number of Credits 3
Prerequisites (Course : CSIR11, ECPE12, C/C++ and Python Programming skills
code)
Course Type : PE
Course Learning Objective
 To understand basics of an IOT System, IoT sensors, IoT hardware and communication
protocols, data storage, data analysis and use them for real time IoT enabled domains.
Course Content
Introduction to IoT and IoT levels : Functional blocks of an IoT system (Sensors, Data Ingress,
Data Aggregation Point Communication point back to the cloud, Analysis, Decision making,
Actuation) Basic of Physical and logical design of IoT (IoT protocols, communication models) IoT
enabled domains (Home automation, Smart cities, environment monitoring, renewable energy,
agriculture, industry, healthcare, marketing and management) M2M, Difference between IoT,
Embedded Systems and M2M, Industry 4.0 concepts.
IoT sensors and hardware : Passive and active sensors, differences, Different kinds of sensors
(Temperature, humidity, pressure, obstacle, water flow, accelerometer, colour, gyro, load cell,
finger print, motion, ultrasonic distance, magnetic vibration, eye blink, hear beat, PPG, glucose,
body position, blood pressure), Multi-sensors, Pre-processing (sampling, filtering, ADC, size of
data, local memory, compression), IoT front end hardware (Raspberry Pi, Arduino, Galileo, beagle
bone equivalent platforms)
Introduction to IoT protocols :Infrastructure (6LowPAN, IPv4/IPv6, RPL), Identification (EPC,
uCode, IPv6, URIs), Communication/ Transport (Wi-Fi, Bluetooth, ZigBee, LPWAN), Data
Protocols (MQTT, CoAP, AMQP, Websocket, Node)
IoT Cloud and data analytics :Collecting data from sensors,Data Ingress, Cloud storage, IoT
cloud platforms (Amazon AWS, Microsoft Azure, Google APIs), Data analytics for IoT, Software
and management tool for IoT, Dashboard design
IoT architectures with case studies :Business models for IoT, smart cities, agriculture, healthcare,
industry. Case studies/Mini projectsfor the real time IoT applications.
Text Books
1. Arshdeep Bahga, Vijay Madisetti, “Internet of Things – A hands-on approach”, Universities
Press, 2015.
Reference Books
1. Raj kamal, Internet of Things, Architecture and Design Principles, McGraw-Hill, 2017
2. Manoel Carlos Ramon, “Intel® Galileo and Intel® Galileo Gen 2: API Features and
Arduino Projects for Linux Programmers”, Apress, 2014.H.Gerez, “Algorithms for VLSI
Design Automation”, John Wiley, 1999.
1. Marco Schwartz, “Internet of Things with the Arduino Yun”, Packt Publishing, 2014..
COURSEOUTCOMES
Students are ableto
CO1: understand basic premise of an IOT System
CO2 : be familiar with the sensors available for IoT applications
CO3 : learn the front-end hardware platforms and communication protocols for IoT.
CO4 : understand cloud storage, data analysis and management
CO5 : usage for real time IoT enabled domains
46 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015