CE206 Surveying - II 3 0 0 3
CE206 SURVEYING – II
Course objectives:
To understand the basics and elements of different types of curves on roads and their
preliminary survey
To learn about surveying applications in setting out of curves, buildings, culverts and tunnels
To get introduced to different geodetic methods of survey such as triangulation, trigonometric
leveling
To learn about errors in measurements and their adjustments in a traverse
To get introduced to modern advanced surveying techniques involved such as Remote
sensing, Total station, GPS, Photogrammetry etc.
Course Content
Curve setting – Horizontal curves - Elements of simple and compound curves – Methods of setting out
– Reverse curve – Transition curve – Length of curve – Elements of cubic parabola, true spiral and
cubic spiral – Vertical curve – parabola – Setting out of buildings – culverts – tunnels.
Triangulation – different networks – orders and accuracies – intervisibility and height of stations –
signals and towers – Baseline measurement – instruments and accessories – tape corrections –
extension of baseline – satellite stations – Reduction to centre.
Trignometrical levelling – Observations for heights and distances – Geodetic observations –
Corrections for refraction, curvature, axis signal – Reciprocal observations.
Errors – Types of errors – Theory of least squares – weighted observations – most probable value –
computations of indirectly observed quantities – method of normal equations – conditioned quantities,
method of correlates, method of differences – adjustment of simple triangle and quadrilateral network
without central station.
Electromagnetic distance measurement (EDM) – Principle – Types – Total station - Photogrammetry –
Terrestrial and Aerial photographs – Photo interpretation – Stereoscopy - Remote Sensing – Principle –
Idealized remote sensing system – Types – applications - Introduction to GPS – Segments – Principle
of working – application.
References
1. Duggal, S.K. Surveying Vol. I and II, Tata McGraw Hill, 2004.
2. Punmia, B.C. Surveying Vol.I and II, Standard Publishers, 1994.
3. Arora, K. R. Surveying Vol. I and II, Standard Book House, 1996.
4. Satheesh Gopi. Advanced Surveying, Pearson Education, 2007.
5. Satheesh Gopi. The Global Positioning System and Surveying using GPS, Tata McGraw, 2005.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
set out curves, buildings, culverts and tunnels
carry out a geodetic survey, taking accurate measurements using instruments and adjusting
the traverse
14
Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
apply mathematical adjustment of accidental errors involved in surveying measurements
plan a survey for applications such as road alignment and height of the building
invoke advanced surveying techniques over conventional methods in the field of civil
engineering