Course Code : ECPE42
Course Title : Electromagnetic Interference and Compatibility
Number of Credits : 3
Prerequisites : NONE
(Course code)
Course Type : Elective
COURSE OBJECTIVE
 Electromagnetic interference (EMI) is a potential threat to the present day electronic systems.
The main objective of the course is to provide insight into various sources of electromagnetic
interferences and how to design an electronic product which is electromagnetically compatible
with each other.
COURSE CONTENT
Introduction to EMI and EMC- Various EMC requirements and standards-Need for EMC and its
importance in electronic product design - sources of EMI - few case studies on EMC.
Conducted and radiated emission -power supply line filters-common mode and differential mode
current-common mode choke- switched mode power supplies. Shielding techniques- shielding
effectiveness-shield behavior for electric and magnetic field -aperture-seams-conductive gaskets-
conductive coatings
Grounding techniques- signal ground-single point and multi point grounding-system ground-common
impedance coupling -common mode choke-Digital circuit power distribution and grounding.
Contact protection - arc and glow discharge-contact protection network for inductive loads-C, RC,
RCD protection circuit- inductive kick back. RF and transient immunity-transient protection
network- RFI mitigation filter-power line disturbance- ESD- human body model- ESD protection in
system design.
PCB design for EMC compliance-PCB layout and stack up- multi layer PCB objectives- Return path
discontinuities-mixed signal PCB layout. EMC pre compliance measurement-conducted and radiated
emission test-LISN-Anechoic chamber.
Text Books:
1. H. W. Ott, Electromagnetic Compatibility Engineering, 2nd edition, John Wiley & Sons, 2011,
ISBN: 9781118210659.
2. C. R. Paul, Introduction to Electromagnetic Compatibility, 2nd edition, Wiley India, 2010,
ISBN: 9788126528752
Reference Book:
1. K. L. Kaiser, Electromagnetic Compatibility Handbook, 1st edition, CRC Press, 2005. ISBN:
9780849320873
COURSE OUTCOMES
Students are able to
CO1: Understand the various sources of Electromagnetic interference
CO2: Familiarize the fundamentals those are essential for product design with EMC compliance
and various EMC standards
CO3:. would gain knowledge to understand the concept of Shielding and grounding related to
product design.
CO4:. Design PCBs which are electromagnetically compatible
CO5: understand and differentiate the various EMC pre compliance measurement
65 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015