Course Code : ECPE38
Course Title : ADHOC WIRELESS NETWORKS
Number of Credits 3
Prerequisites : ECPE10
(Course code)
Course Type : PE
Course learning Objective
 To analyse the various design issues and challenges in the layered architecture of Ad hoc
wireless networks
Course content
Cellular and ad hoc wireless networks, Applications of ad hoc wireless networks. Issues in ad hoc
wireless networks-medium access scheme, routing, transport layer protocols, security and energy
management. Ad hoc wireless internet.
Design goals of a MAC protocol, Contention based protocols; Contention based protocols with
reservation mechanisms and scheduling mechanisms, MAC protocols using directional antennas.
Table driven routing protocols, On demand routing protocols, hybrid routing protocols, Hierarchical
routing protocols, Power aware routing protocols, Tree based and mesh based multicast routing
protocols
Network security requirements-Issues and challenges, network security attacks, key management,
secure routing protocols
Energy management schemes-Battery management, transmission power management, system
power management schemes. Quality of service solutions in ad hoc wireless networks.
Text books
1. C.Siva ram murthy, B.S. Manoj, “Ad hoc wireless networks-Architectures and protocols”
Pearson Education, 2005
2. S.Basagni, M.Conti, “Mobile ad hoc networking”, Wielyinterscience2004
References books
1. C. E.Perkins ,”Ad hoc networking”, AddisonWesley,2001
2. X.Cheng, X.Huang ,D.Z. DU ,”Ad hoc wireless networking”, Kluwer
AcademicPublishers,2004
3. G. Aggelou,”Mobile ad hoc networks-From wireless LANs to 4G networks”, McGraw Hill
publishers,2005
4. Recent literature in ADHOC Wireless Networks.
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able
CO1: compare the differences between cellular and ad hoc networks and the analyze the
challenges at various layers and applications
CO2: summarize the protocols used at the MAC layer and scheduling mechanisms
CO3: compare and analyze types of routing protocols used for unicast and multicast
routing
CO4: examine the network security solution and routing mechanism
CO5: evaluate the energy management schemes and Quality of service solution in ad hoc
networks
60 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015