Course Code : ICPC21
Course Title : Process Control
Type of Course : PC
Prerequisites : ICPC18
Contact Hours : 42 (3 credits)
Course Assessment Methods : Continuous Assessment, End Assessment
Course Learning Objectives (CLO)
CLO1 To introduce the terminology and concepts associated with Process control domain.
CLO2 To impart knowledge in the design of control systems and PID controller tuning for
processes.
CLO3 To familiarize the students with characteristics, selection, sizing of control valves.
CLO4 To elaborate different types of control schemes such as cascade control, feed
forward control and Model Based control schemes.
Course Content
Process Control System: Terms and objectives, piping and Instrumentation diagram,
instrument terms and symbols. Regulatory and servo control, classification of variables.
Process characteristics: Process equation, degrees of freedom, modeling of simple system,
Self-regulating processes, interacting and non- interacting processes, Process lag, load
disturbance and their effect on processes.
Controller modes: Basic control action, two position, multi-position, floating control modes.
Continuous controller modes: proportional, integral, derivative. Composite controller modes:
P-I, P-D, P-I-D, Integral wind-up and prevention. Auto/Manual transfer, Bumpless transfer.
Response of controllers for different test inputs. Selection of control modes for processes like
level, pressure, temperature and flow.
Final control elements: Pneumatic and electrical actuators, Valve positioners. Pneumatic and
electrical dampers, Control valves types, construction details, various plug characteristics.
Energy efficient valves - Valve sizing - selection of control valves. Inherent and installed valve
characteristics. Fail-safe operation, Cavitation and flashing in control valves, Instrument air
supply specifications.
Controller tuning Methods: Evaluation criteria - IAE, ISE, ITAE. Process reaction curve
method, continuous oscillation method, damped oscillation method. Auto tuning. Closed loop
response of I and II order systems, with and without valve, measuring element dynamics.
Advanced control system: Cascade control, ratio control, feed forward control. Over-ride, split
range and selective control. Multivariable process control, interaction of control loops.
Introduction to Dynamic Matrix Control. Case Studies: Distillation column, boiler drum level
control and chemical reactor control.
References
1. G. Stephanopoulos, Chemical Process Control-An Introduction to Theory and
Practice. Prentice Hall of India, New Delhi, 3rd Edition, 2008
2. D.R. Coughanowr, Steven E LeBlanc, Process Systems Analysis and Control,
McGraw Hill, Singapore, 3rd Edition,2009
3. B.W. Bequette, Process Control Modeling, Design and Simulation. Prentice Hall
of India, New Delhi, 2004
4. William C. Dunn, Introduction to Instrumentation, Sensors, and Process Control,
Artech House publishers, 2005
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 64 | Pa ge
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli
5. C.A. Smith and A.B Corripio., Principles and Practice of Automatic Process Control,
John Wiley and Sons, New York, 3rd Edition2005
6. Bela G. Liptak, Instrument Engineers' Handbook, Volume II: Process Control and
Optimization, CRC Press, 4th Edition, 2005
7. D.E. Seborg, T.E. Edgar, D.A. Mellichamp. Process Dynamics and Control, Wiley
India Pvt. Ltd., Fourth Edition.2016
8. Wolfgang Altmann, Practical Process Control for Engineers and Technicians ,
Elsevier/Newnes publishing, 2009
9. Donald P. Eckman, Automatic Process Control, Wiley India Pvt Ltd, 2009.
10. Paul W. Murril, Fundamentals of Process Control Theory, ISA press, New York, 3rd
Edition, 2000
Course Outcomes (CO)
On completion of this course, the students will be able to,
CO1 Build models of various processes using first principles approach, and perform the
analysis.
CO2 Design, tune and implement PID Controllers to achieve desired performance for
various processes
CO3 Analyze the systems and implement control schemes for various processes.
CO4 Comprehend advanced process control strategies.
Course Outcome and Programme Outcome Mapping
0 1 2 1 2 3
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 1 1 O O O
O O O O O O O O O O O O S S S
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
CO1 3 2 2 3 3 1 1 1 2 2 2 3 3 3 -
CO2 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 2 2 2 2 3 3 3 -
CO3 3 3 3 3 3 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 3 3 2
CO4 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 2 2 2 2 3 3 3 2
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 65 | Pa ge
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli