AR451 Urban and Regional Planning 3 0 0 3
AR451 URBAN AND REGIONAL PLANNING
Course objectives:
To understand the trend of urbanization and planning process
To study about various types of plans
To study about the planning principles
To know how to implement the plan and financing for plan
To know about the urban development control regulations
Course Content
Definition and classification of urban areas - Trend of urbanization - Planning process - Various stages
of the planning process - Surveys in planning.
Plans - Delineation of planning areas- Regional plan, Master plan, Structure plan, detailed development
plan and Transportation plan.
Planning principles of Ebenezer Howard (Garden city movement), Patrick Geddes, Dr.C.A.Doxiades,
Soria Y Mata (Linear city) and Clarence, A. Perry (The neighborhood concept).
Plan implementation- Urban Planning agencies and their functions - Financing- Public, private, Non-
governmental organizations- Public participation in Planning.
Development control regulations- Town and country planning act- Building bye-laws.
References
1. Hutchinson, B.G., Principles of Urban Transport Systems Planning, Scripta, McGraw-Hill, New
York, 1974.
2. Claire, Hand Book of Urban Planning, Van Nostrand Book Company, 1974.
3. Gallian, B. Arthur and Simon Eisner, The Urban Pattern - City Planning and Design, Affiliated Press
Pvt. Ltd., New Delhi, 1985.
4. Margaret Roberts, An Introduction to Town Planning Techniques, Hutchinson, London, 1980.
5. Hiraskar,G.K., Fundamentals of Town Planning, Dhanpat Rai Publications, 1992.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
identify the stages of planning process and surveys in planning
apply the principles of the regional, master, structural and detailed development plans
apply the concepts of the garden city movement, linear city and neighbourhood
50
Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
demonstrate the functions of planning and financing agencies
apply the town and country plan act and building by-laws