Course Code : ECHO13
Course Title : WAVELET SIGNAL PROCESSING
Number of Credits 4
Prerequisites : ECPC15
(Course code)
Course Type : HO
Course learning Objective
 To expose the students to the basics of wavelet theory and to illustrate the use of wavelet
processing for data compression and noise suppression.
Course content
Limitations of standard Fourier analysis. Windowed Fourier transform. Continuous wavelet transform.
Time-frequency resolution.
Multiresolution analysis and properties. The Haar wavelet, Structure of subspaces in MRA
Haar decomposition-1, Haar decomposition-2, Wavelet reconstruction, Haar wavelet and link to filter
bank, demo on wavelet decomposition, Wavelet packets
Wavelet methods for signal processing. Noise suppression. Representation of noise-corrupted signals
using frames. Algorithm for reconstruction from corrupted frame representation.
Wavelet methods for image processing. Burt- Adelson and Mallat’s pyramidal decomposition
schemes. 2D-dyadic wavelet transform.
Text Books
1. E.Hernandez & G.Weiss, A First Course on Wavelets, CRC Press, 1996.
2. L.Prasad & S.S.Iyengar, Wavelet Analysis with Applications to Image Processing, CRC Press,
1997.
Reference Books
1. A.Teolis, Computational Signal Processing with Wavelets, Birkhauser, 1998
2. R.M. Rao & A.S. Bopardikar, Wavelet Transforms, Addition Wesley, 1998.
3. J.C. Goswami & A.K. Chan, Fundamentals of Wavelets, John Wiley, 1999.
4. Recent literature in Wavelet Signal Processing.
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able
CO1: understand about windowed Fourier transform and difference between windowed Fourier
transform and wavelet transform.
CO2: understand wavelet basis and characterize continuous and discrete wavelet transforms
CO3: understand multi resolution analysis and identify various wavelets and evaluate their time-
frequency resolution properties
CO4: implement discrete wavelet transforms in signal processing applications
CO5: understand about wavelet methods in image processing
131 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015