Course Code : ECPE28
Course Title : COMMUNICATION SWITCHING SYSTEMS
Number of Credits 3
Prerequisites : ECPC18
(Course code)
Course Type : PE
Course learning Objective
 To understand the working principles of switching systems from manual and electromechanical
systems to stored program control systems.
Course content
Basic elements of communication network. Switching systems. Signaling and signaling functions.
Digital telephone network. TDM Principles. PCM primary multiplex group. Plesiochronous digital
hierarchy. Synchronous digital hierarchy. Echo cancellers.
Digital transmission and multiplexing. Synchronous versus Asynchronous transmission. Line coding.
Error performance. TDM. Framing, TDM loops and rings.
Space division switching. Multiple-stage switching. Design examples. Switching matrix control. Time
division switching. Multiple-stage time and spaces witching.
Timing recovery. Jitter. Network synchronization. Digital subscriber access-ISDN. ADSL. HFC.
Traffic analysis.
Text Books
rd
1. J.C. Bellamy, “Digital Telephony”, Wiley, 3 edition, 2011.
2. J.E. Flood, “Telecommunications Switching, Traffic and Networks” Pearson,1st
edition,2012
Reference Books
1. T.Viswanathan, “Telecommunication Switching Systems and Networks”, PHI, 2006.
2. E.Keiser & E.Strange, “Digital Telephony and Network Integration”, Springer, 2nd edition,
1995.
3. R. L.Freeman, “Fundamentals of Telecommunications”, John Wiley and Sons, 2ndedition,
1999.
4. Recent literature in Communication Switching Systems.
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able
CO1: explain the working principle of switching systems involved in telecommunication
switching
CO2: assess the need for voice digitization and T Carrier systems
CO3: compare and analyze Line coding techniques and examine its error performance
CO4: design multi stage switching structures involving time and space switching stages
CO5: analyze basic telecommunication traffic theory
49 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015