Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
apply the principle of virtual work
determine deflection of a beam for various loading conditions
apply unit load method to find the deflection of truss
determine different stresses developed in thick cylinders
visualize the behavior of column for combined bending and axial loading
CE204 MECHANICS OF FLUIDS - II
Course objectives:
To classify the types of flows in open channel and also to design open channel sections in a
most economical fashion with minimum wetted perimeter and learn about critical flows
To study about non uniform flows in open channel and longitudinal slopes in open channel and
also to learn about the characteristics of hydraulic jump
To develop an understanding of fluid flow patterns and learns to use boundary layer theory and
drag
To provide insights to the open channel hydraulics and introduce dimensional analysis for fluid
flow problems
To study in detail about boundary layers theory
Course Content
Ideal fluid flow- Uniform flow- source - sink- doublet - combination of flow patterns - uniform flow and
source- flow around cylinder - flow with circulation - lift. Boundary layer - displacement and momentum
thickness - development of flow in circular pipes - Von Karman momentum equation - Laminar and
turbulent boundary layers on flat plates - Drag in flat plates, cylinders and spheres - Drag coefficients -
Boundary layer control.
Open Channel Flow - Classification - Terminology - velocity distribution in open channels - Chezy,
Manning and other formulae - Best hydraulic section - specific energy - specific force - hydraulic jump
and its characteristics - Gradually varied flow - computation of surface profiles. Velocity measurement
with Pitot tube, Prandtl Pitot tube and current meter - discharge measurement in pipe flow -
venturimeter, mouthpiece, orificemeter, nozzlemeter, bendmeter and rotameter - discharge
measurement in open channel flow - All types of notches and weirs, venturiflume - critical depth meter -
basic principles. Introduction to CFD- Dimensional homogeneity - dimensional analysis - Rayleigh`s
method - Buckingham Pi theorem - applications - significance of dimensionless numbers - Model study
and similitude - scale effect and distorted models .
References
1. Streeter, V.L. Fluid Mechanics, Tata McGraw Hill, 1998.
2. Chow, V.T. Open Channel Hydraulics, Tata McGraw Hill, 1975.
3. Nagaratnam, S. Fluid Mechanics, Khanna Publishers, 1989.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
visualize fluid flow phenomena observed in Civil Engineering systems such as flow in a pipe,
flow measurement through orifices, mouth pieces, notches and weirs
13