CE205 Surveying - I 3 0 0 3
CE205 SURVEYING - I
Course objectives:
To understand the importance of surveying in the field of civil engineering
To study the basics of linear/angular measurement methods like chain surveying, compass
surveying
To study the significance of plane table surveying in plan making
To know the basics of levelling and theodolite survey in elevation and angular measurements
To understand tacheometric surveying in distance and height measurements
Course Content
Introduction and Principles of surveying – Classification – Brief introduction to chain surveying –
Chaining and ranging - Compass surveying – Prismatic compass only – Instruments – Bearing of
survey lines – systems and conversions – Local attraction – Latitude and departure – Traversing –
Traverse adjustment of closing errors.
6
Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
Plane Table surveying – instruments and accessories – advantages and disadvantages of plane table
surveying – methods – radiation, intersection, traversing, resection – Two and three point problems –
errors in plane table surveying.
Levelling – Definitions – Levelling instruments – Temporary and permanent adjustments – Booking –
Reduction to levels – Correction for Curvature and refraction – Classification of leveling – Profile
Levelling – Differential levelling – Reciprocal levelling – longitudinal and cross sectioning - Contours –
Contour interval – Methods of contouring – uses.
Theodolite surveying – Vernier theodolite – Temporary and permanent adjustments – Measurement of
horizontal and vertical angles – Methods of repetition and reiteration – errors in theodolite surveying –
elimination of errors - Area and volume computation – area from latitude and departure – Simpson’s
rule and Trapezoidal rule.
Tacheometric surveying – Principles – Methods – Stadia system –Fixed and Movable hair methods –
Methods with staff held vertical and normal – Analytic lens – Subtense bar – Tangential method.
References
1. Duggal, S.K. Surveying Vol. I and II, Tata McGraw Hill, 2004.
2. Punmia, B.C. Surveying Vol.I and II, Standard Publishers, 1994.
3. Arora, K. R. Surveying Vol. I and II, Standard Book House, 1996
.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
carry out preliminary surveying in the field of civil engineering applications such as structural,
highway engineering and geotechnical engineering
plan a survey, taking accurate measurements, field booking, plotting and adjustment of
traverse
use various conventional instruments involved in surveying with respect to utility and precision
plan a survey for applications such as road alignment and height of the building
undertake measurement and plotting in civil engineering