Course Code : MAIR34
Course Title : Probability and Distribution theory
Type of Course : IR
Prerequisites : -
Contact Hours : 56 (4 credits)
Course Assessment Methods : Continuous Assessments, End Assessment
Course Learning Objectives (CLO)
To formally introduce the ideas of uncertainty and randomness that prevail in
measurements and generation of controlled sequences in engineering
applications.
The course objectives are: to
CLO1 Familiarize basic concepts of probability and random variables
CLO2 Identifying and analyzing random variables in practical problems
CLO3 Introduce important probability distributions for analyzing the data
CLO4 Solve real-world problem using probability techniques
Course Content
Introduction to Basic Probability, Review of set theory and combinatorics, binomial probability
law, computer simulations of real-world examples – communications and quality control,
Conditional Probability, Joint events, statistically independent events, Bayes theorem,
applications to cluster recognition
Probability of discrete random variables, Important probability mass functions (PMFs),
Approximation of the binomial PMF with Poisson PMF, Transformations, Cumulative
distribution functions, expected values of discrete random variables, functions of discrete
random variables, variance and moments, characteristic functions, estimating means and
variances, applications to data compression
Jointly distributed random variables, expectations, joint moments, prediction of outcomes, joint
characteristic functions, Conditional PMFs.
Continuous random variables, expectations, Conditional probability density functions,
continuous N- dimensional random variables, applications to signal detection.
Probability and moment approximations, Law of large numbers, central limit theorem,
applications to cooperative control and opinion polling.
References
1. M.C. Douglas, and R.C. George, Applied Statistics and Probability for Engineers,7th
Edition, Wiley,2018
2. S. M. Kay, Intuitive Probability and Random Processes using MATLAB, Springer, 2017
3. S. Ross, Introduction to Probability and Statistics for Engineers and Scientists, 5th
Edition, Elsevier,2014
4. Y. Viniotis, Probability and Stochastic Processes for Electrical Engineers, Tata McGraw
Hill,1998
5. M. Evans and J. Rosenthal, Probability and Statistics: The Science of Uncertainty, 2nd
Edition, WH Freeman, 2010
6. P. Olofson, Probabilities: The Little Numbers that Rule our Lives, Wiley, 2007
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 28 | Pa ge
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli
Course Outcomes (CO)
On successful completion of the course students will be able to
CO1 Identify an appropriate probability distribution for a given discrete or continuous
random variable and use its properties to calculate probabilities
CO2 Evaluate probabilities for joint distributions including marginal and conditional
probabilities
CO3 Derive the probability density function of random variables and use techniques to
generate data from various distributions
CO4 Translate real-world problems into probability models and apply probability and
statistical techniques for solving them.
Course Outcome and Programme Outcome Mapping
0 1 2 1 2 3
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 1 1 O O O
O O O O O O O O O O O O S S S
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
CO1 3 3 3 3 3 - - - 2 2 2 3 3 3 -
CO2 3 3 3 3 3 - - - 2 2 2 3 3 3 -
CO3 3 3 3 3 3 - - - 2 2 2 3 3 3 -
CO4 2 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 3 3 3 2 2 2 1
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 29 | Pa ge
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli