Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
ELECTIVES
Code Course of Study L T P C
CE352 Groundwater Hydrology 3 0 0 3
CE451 Experimental Stress Analysis 3 0 0 3
CE452 Earthquake Resistant Structures 3 0 0 3
CE453 Remote Sensing and GIS 3 0 0 3
CE454 Advanced Foundation Engineering 3 0 0 3
CE455 Hydrology 3 0 0 3
CE456 Water Power Engineering 3 0 0 3
CE457 Structural Dynamics 3 0 0 3
CE458 Finite Element Method 3 0 0 3
CE459 Models for Air and Water Quality 3 0 0 3
CE460 Transportation planning 3 0 0 3
CE461 Pavement Analysis and Design 3 0 0 3
CE462 Advanced Surveying Techniques 3 0 0 3
CE463 Steel-Concrete Composite Structures 3 0 0 3
CE464 Geotechnical Earthquake Engineering 3 0 0 3
ME453 Industrial Safety 3 0 0 3
ME457 Computational Fluid Dynamics 3 0 0 3
AR451 Urban and Regional Planning 3 0 0 3
MA302 Operations Research Techniques in Civil Engineering 3 0 0 3
HM404 Creative writing through literature 3 0 0 3
3
Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
ELECTIVES
CE352 GROUND WATER HYDROLOGY
Course objectives:
To know the types of aquifers
To understand the surface and subsurface investigation in detail
To integrate the fundamental and basic knowledge of ground water movement
To understand the process of sea water intrusion and recharge
To introduce the different model studies
Course Content
Groundwater occurrence – distribution – aquifer – types - Surface investigation - Geophysical -
electrical resistivity - Seismic refraction - Gravity and magnetic - Geologic - Air photo interpretation -
Dowsing.
Subsurface investigation - test drilling - resistivity logging- potential logging - temperature and caliper
logging.
Steady unidirectional flow - well in a uniform flow - steady flow with uniform recharge - unsteady radial
flow to a well - well flow near aquifer boundaries - Multiple well systems - partially penetrating wells -
characteristic well losses.
Secular and seasonal variations - Fluctuations due to evapo-transpiration, Meteorological phenomena,
tides, external loads and earthquakes - control by drains and wells.
Recharge through sewage pits, shafts and wells.
Occurrence of sea water intrusion - Ghypon-Heizberg relation between fresh and saline waters - shape
length and structure of the fresh salt water interface - prevention and control of seawater intrusion -
role of sea water in ground water - coastal zoning.
Sand models - Electrical models - Viscous fluid models - membrane models - numerical analysis
methods
References
1. Raghunath H.M., Ground Water Hydrology, New-Age International, 2nd Edition, 1990.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
identify types of aquifers
carry out surface and subsurface investigation to locate groundwater
visualise the occurrence and movement of groundwater
select suitable type of ground water recharge
assess sea water intrusion and its control
CE451 EXPERIMENTAL STRESS ANALYSIS
Course objectives:
To study the working principles of different types of strain gauges
37
Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
To understand the model analysis
To know the fundamentals of photo elastic coatings
To study the effects of 2-D photo elasticity
To study the working principle of load, pressure and displacement transducers
Course Content
Strain gauges – Mechanical, optical, acoustic, electrical inductance and capacitance pneumatic types –
description and working principles
Electrical resistance strain gauges, gauge characteristics and types – Equipment for recording static
strain – reduction of strain gauge data.
Load, pressure and displacement transducers.
Model analysis – direct and indirect models – law of structural similitude – choice of scales – Model
materials – limitations of model studies –Buckingham PI theorem – design of direct and indirect models
– Beggs deformeter and its applications.
Two dimensional photo – elasticity – optical principles stress optic law – Methods of producing isoclines
and isochromatics using polariscopes – Methods of measuring fractional fringe orders – model
materials – separation techniques
Fundamental of Photo elastic coatings, Moire fringe and brittle coating techniques – Introduction to
stress freezing techniques – Introduction to non-destructive testings
References
1. Daley and Riley, Experimental Stress Analysis, McGraw Hill Book Company, 1987
2. Srinath, L.S. et al., Experimental Stress Analysis, Tata McGraw Hill 1984.
3. Hetenyi, M., Hand Book of Experimental Stress Analysis, John Wiley & Sons. Inc New York. 1980.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
identify the different types of strain gauges
carry out model analysis
apply the concepts of photo elastic coatings
analyze the behavior of 2-D photo elasticity
apply the working principles of transducers
CE452 EARTHQUAKE RESISTANT STRUCTURES
Course objectives:
To introduce the basics of Earthquake Engineering
To introduce the engineering seismology, building geometrics & characteristics, structural
irregularities,
To introduce tips on earthquake engineering - do’s and don’ts
To introduce cyclic loading behaviour of RC, steel and pre-stressed concrete elements
To discuss code provisions and their application on different types of structures
38
Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
Course Content
Elements of Engineering Seismology - Theory of Vibrations -Indian Seismicity -Earthquake History -
Behavior of structures in the past Earthquakes.
Seismic Design Concepts - Cyclic loading behavior of RC, Steel and Prestressed Concrete elements -
Response Spectrum- Design spectrum - capacity based design.
Provision of Seismic Code frames, shear walls, Braced frames, Combinations - Torsion.
Performance of Regular Buildings 3D Computer Analysis of Building Systems (Theory only) - Design
and Detailing of frames - Shear walls and Frame walls.
Seismic performance - Irregular Buildings -Soil performance, Modern Concepts - Base Isolation -
Adoptive systems - Case studies.
References
1. Pankaj Agarwal and Manish ShriKhande, Earthquake Resistant Design of Structures, Prentice- Hall
of India, New Delhi, 2003.
2. Bullen K.E., Introduction to the Theory of Seismology, Great Britain at the University Printing
houses, Cambridge University Press 1996.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
apply the basics of Earthquake Engineering
demonstrate the dynamics of structural system under earthquake load
analyze the influence of the structural / geometrical design in building characteristics
demonstrate the cyclic loading behaviour of RC steel and pre-stressed concrete elements
apply codal provisions on different types of structures
CE453 REMOTE SENSING AND GIS
Course objectives:
To know about the principles of remote sensing and spectral signatures
To know about satellites, types of remote sensing and digital image processing
To study about the history and components of GIS
To study about data types and operations
To know the applications of remote sensing and GIS
Course Content
Remote Sensing – Principle - Electro-magnetic energy, spectrum - EMR interaction with atmosphere –
Atmospheric Windows and its Significance – EMR interaction with Earth Surface Materials – Spectral
Signature and Spectral Signature curves for water, soil and Earth Surface.
Satellites - Classification – Satellite Sensors – satellite and sensor parameters - Resolution – Types of
Remote Sensing - Visual Interpretation of Satellite Images – Digital Image processing – Characteristics
of different platforms: Landsat, SPOT, IRS series, IKONOS, QUICKBIRD – Radar, LIDAR, SAR,
MODIS, AMSRE, Sonar remote sensing systems.
39
Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
GIS - History of Development - Components of GIS – Hardware, Software and Organizational Context –
Data – Spatial and Non-Spatial – Data Input Sources–– DBMS – Data Output - Data models - Raster
and Vector data structures – Data compression – Raster vs. vector comparison
Analysis using Raster and Vector data – Operations – Overlaying - Buffering – Modelling in GIS - Digital
Terrain Modelling, Analysis and application – Products of DEMs and their uses – Sources of errors in
GIS and their elimination
Applications of Remote Sensing and GIS – Advanced applications of GIS – Disaster management,
Water resource, Landuse – Land cover – Urban planning - Intelligent Transport Systems - Development
of Resources Information Systems.
References
1. Burrough P.A. and Rachel A. McDonell, Principles of Geographical Information Systems, Oxford
Publication, 2004.
2. C.P. Lo and Albert K. W. Yeung, Concepts and Techniques of Geographical Information Systems,
Prentice- Hall India, 2006.
3. Thomas. M. Lillesand and Ralph. W. Kiefer, Remote Sensing and Image Interpretation, John Wiley
and Sons, 2003.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
demonstrate the concepts of Electro Magnetic energy, spectrum and spectral signature curves
apply the concepts of satellite and sensor parameters and characteristics of different platforms
apply the concepts of DBMS in GIS
analyze raster and vector data and modelling in GIS
apply GIS in land use, disaster management, ITS and resource information system
CE454 ADVANCED FOUNDATION ENGINEERING
Course objectives:
To explain the analysis of sheet pile wall under different support conditions
To explain overall stability analysis of well foundation
To explain fundamentals of soil dynamics and its application to machine foundation analysis
including codel provisions
To explain problems related to expansive soils and solution to overcome
To explain the concept of slope stability analysis for various slope conditions including
graphical methods
Course Content
Sheet pile structures - cantilever sheet pile walls in granular and cohesive soils - Anchored bulk
heads - Free earth support and fixed earth support methods - Anchors.
Cofferdams - types - cellular cofferdam - uses - Design by TVA and Cumming's method.
Well foundations - Types of caissons - Analysis of well foundations - determination of scourdepth
- steining thickness - well sinking.
Foundations subjected to vibrations - elements of vibrations - Free, damped, free and forced vibrations
- Design criteria - Pauw's analogy - IS Code of practice for impact and reciprocating machines.
40
Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
Foundation drainage and water proofing - Dewatering well points system, sand drains.
Foundations in expansive soils - Mechanism - factors influencing swelling - Use of Geosynthetics.
Stability analysis of slopes - infinite slopes in sand and clays - finite slope - Swedish circle - stability
of earth dam slope during steady and sudden draw down - friction circle method - Taylor's stability
number. Sheet pile structures - Anchored bulk heads
References
1. Bowles, J.E., Foundation Analysis and Design, McGraw Hill., 1996.
2. Braja M. Das, Principles of Foundation Engineering, Thomos Asia Pvt. Ltd., Singapore, 2005.
3. Shamsher Prakash, Soil Dynamics, McGraw - Hill Book Company, 1985.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
analyze and design any kind of sheet pile wall system including coffer dam
analyze and design well foundation including complete stability analysis
estimate soil parameters under dynamic conditions including machine foundations
design a suitable foundation system for any kind of problematic soils
analyze the stability of any kind of slope by using both theoretical and graphical methods
CE455 HYDROLOGY
Course objectives:
To provide knowledge in the hydrological cycle, precipitation, evapotranspiration, infiltration and
its measurements
To understand the physics of translate of rainfall into runoff modeling of various runoff
techniques
To estimate the runoff
To develop ability to apply the analytical and numerical techniques to ground and surface water
models
To understand hydrographs and IUH
Course Content
Precipitation circulation - temperature - Humidity – wind formation and forms of precipitation -
Interpretation of precipitation data - snow cover and snow fall. Factors affecting and methods of
determining evaporation, infiltration and evapo-transpiration- Run-off cycle - factors affecting run-off -
estimation of run-off by stream gauging - stage - discharge rating curves - Selection of site for a stream
gauge station.
Derivation of unit hydrograph from complex storms - unit hydrographs for various duration - Synthetic
unit hydrograph - Transposing unit hydrograph - Application of the unit hydrograph. Linear
Regression - Statistical and probability analysis of hydrological data - Flood frequency probability and
stochastic methods - Basics of Stochastic and Deterministic models.
References
1. Ragunath, H.M., Hydrology, Wiley Eastern, 1990.
41