Course Code : ECHO27
Course Title : ASYNCHRONOUS SYSTEM DESIGN
Number of Credits 3
Prerequisites : ECPC14
(Course code)
Course Type : HO
Course learning Objectives
 This subject introduces the fundamentals and performance of Asynchronous system
 To familiarize the dependency graphical analysis of signal transmission graphs
 To learn software languages and its syntax and operations for implementing Asynchronous
Designs
Course content
Fundamentals: Handshake protocols, Muller C-element, Muller pipeline, Circuit implementation
styles, theory. Static data-flow structures: Pipelines and rings, Building blocks, examples
Performance: A quantitative view of performance, quantifying performance, Dependency graphic
analysis. Handshake circuit implementation: Fork, join, and merge, Functional blocks, mutual
exclusion, arbitration and Metastability.
Speed-independent control circuits: Signal Transition graphs, Basic Synthesis Procedure,
Implementation using state-holding gates, Summary of the synthesis Process, Design examples using
Petrify. Advanced 4- phase bundled data protocols and circuits: Channels and protocols, Static type
checking, more advanced latch control circuits.
High-level languages and tools: Concurrency and message passing in CSP, Tangram program
examples, Tangram syntax-directed compilation, Martin’s translation process, Using VHDL for
Asynchronous Design. An Introduction to Balsa: Basic concepts, Tool set and design flow, Ancillary
Balsa Tools
The Balsa language: Data types, Control flow and commands, Binary/Unary operators, Program
structure. Building library Components: Parameterized descriptions, Recursive definitions. A simple
DMA controller: Global Registers, Channel Registers, DMA control structure, The Balsa description.
Text Books
1. Asynchronous Circuit Design- Chris. J. Myers, John Wiley &Sons, 2001.
2. Handshake Circuits An Asynchronous architecture for VLSI programming – Kees
Van Berkel Cambridge University Press,2004
Reference Book
1. Principles of Asynchronous Circuit Design-Jens Sparso, Steve Furber, Kluver Academic
Publishers, 2001.
2. Asynchronous Sequential Machine Design and Analysis, Richard F. Tinder,2009
3. A Designer's Guide to Asynchronous VLSI, Peter A. Beerel, Recep O. Ozdag, Marcos
Ferretti,2010
4. Recent literature in Asynchronous System Design.
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able
CO1: understand the fundamentals of Asynchronous protocols
CO2: analyze the performance of Asynchronous System and implement handshake circuits
CO3: understand the various control circuits and Asynchronous system modules
CO4: gain the experience in using high level languages and tools for Asynchronous Design
CO5: learn commands and control flow of Balsa language for implementing Asynchronous
Designs
146 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015