Course Code : ECMI22
Course Title : ANALOG INTEGRATED CIRCUITS
Number of Credits 3
Prerequisites : ECMI17
(Course code)
Course Type : MI
Course Learning Objective
 To introduce the theoretical & circuit aspects of an Op-amp.
Course Content
Operational Amplifiers, DC and AC characteristics, typical op-amp parameters: Finite gain, finite
bandwidth, Offset voltages and currents, Common-mode rejection ratio, Power supply rejection ratio,
Slew rate, Applications of Op-amp: Precision rectifiers. Summing amplifier, Integrators and
differentiators, Log and antilog amplifiers. Instrumentation amplifiers, voltage to current converters.
Active filters: Second order filter transfer function (low pass, high pass, band pass and band reject),
Butterworth, Chebyshev and Bessel filters. Switched capacitor filter. Notch filter, all pass filters,
self-tuned filters
Opamp as a comparator, Schmitt trigger, Astable and monostable multivibrators, Triangular wave
generator, Multivibrators using 555 timer, Data converters: A/D and D/A converters
PLL- basic block diagram and operation, four quadrant multipliers. Phase detector, VCO, Applications
of PLL:Frequency synthesizers, AM detection, FM detection and FSK demodulation.
CMOS differential amplifiers: DC analysis and small signal analysis of differential amplifier with
Restive load, current mirror load and current source load, Input common-mode range and Common-
mode feedback circuits. OTAs vsOpamps. Slew rate, CMRR, PSRR. Two stage amplifiers,
Compensation in amplifiers (Dominant pole compensation).
Text Books
1. S.Franco, Design with Operational Amplifiers and Analog Integrated
2. Circuits (3/e) TMH, 2003.
3. Sedra and Smith, Microelectronics Circuits, Oxford Univ. Press, 2004
Reference Books
1. Coughlin, Driscoll, OP-AMPS and Linear Integrated Circuits, Prentice Hall, 2001.
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able
CO1: infer the DC and AC characteristics of operational amplifiers and its effect on output and
their compensation techniques.
CO2: elucidate and design the linear and nonlinear applications of an op-amp and special
application ICs.
CO3: explain and compare the working of multi vibrators using special application IC 555 and
general purpose op-amp.
CO4: classify and comprehend the working principle of data converters.
CO5: illustrate the function of application specific ICs such as Voltage regulators, PLL and its
application in communication.
114 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015