Course Code : ECOE18
Course Title : WIRELESS SENSOR NETWORKS
Number of Credits 3
Prerequisites : ECPE10
(Course code)
Course Type : OE
Course learning Objective
 To overview the various design issues and challenges in the layered architecture of Wireless
sensor networks
Course content
Motivation for a network of wireless sensor nodes-Definitions and background-challenges and
constraints for wireless sensor networks-Applications. Node architecture-sensing subsystems,
processing Subsystems, Communication interfaces, Prototypes.
Physical layer- Introduction, wireless channel and communication fundamentals – frequency
allocation, modulation and demodulation, wave propagation effects and noise, channels models,
spread spectrum communication, packet transmission and synchronization, quality of wireless
channels and measures for improvement, physical layer and transceiver design consideration in
wireless sensor networks, Energy usage profile, choice of modulation, Power Management
Data link layer- Fundamentals of wireless MAC protocols, Characteristics of MAC protocol in
wireless sensor networks contention-based protocols, Contention free MAC protocols, Hybrid MAC
protocols
Network layer-routing metrics-Flooding and gossiping, Data centric routing, proactive routing on
demand routing, hierarchical routing, Location based routing, QOS based routing. Data Aggregation
– Various aggregation techniques.
Case study-Target detection tracking, Habitat monitoring, Environmental disaster monitoring,
Practical implementation issues, IEEE 802.15.4 low rate WPAN, Operating System Design Issues.
Simulation tools.
Text Books
1. W. Dargie,C. Poellabauer, ”Fundamentals of Wireless sensor networks-Theory and
Practice”, John Wiley & Sons Publication2010
2. K. Sohraby, D.Minoli and T.Znati, “Wireless Sensor Network Technology- Protocols and
Applications”, John Wiley & Sons, 2007.
Reference Books
1. F.Zhao, L.Guibas, “Wireless Sensor Networks: an information processing approach”,
Elsevier publication, 2004.
2. C.S.Raghavendra Krishna,M.Sivalingam and Taribznati, “Wireless Sensor
Networks”, Springer publication,2004.
3. H. Karl, A.willig, “Protocol and Architecture for Wireless Sensor Networks”, John Wiley
publication, Jan2006.
4. K.Akkaya and M.Younis, “A Survey of routing protocols in wireless sensor networks”,
Elsevier Adhoc Network Journal, Vol.3, no.3, pp. 325-349, 2005.
5. Philip Levis, “TinyOS Programming”, 2006 –www.tinyos.net.
6. I.F. Akyildiz, W. Su, Sankara subramaniam, E. Cayirci, “Wireless sensor networks: a
survey”, computer networks, Elsevier, 2002, 394 -422.
7. Jamal N. Al-karaki, Ahmed E. Kamal, “Routing Techniques in Wireless sensor networks:
A survey”, IEEE wireless communication, December 2004, 6 –28.
8. Recent literature in Wireless Sensor Networks.
86 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able
CO1: analyze the challenges and constraints of wireless sensor network and its subsystems
CO2: examine the physical layer specification, modulation and transceiver design
considerations
CO3: analyze the protocols used at the MAC layer and scheduling mechanisms
CO4: compare and analyse the types of routing protocols and data aggregation techniques
CO5: identify the application areas and practical implementation issues.
87 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015