Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
5. Hardness test
6. Tests on brick
7. Tests on cement
8. Tests on concrete
9. Tests on aggregate
10. Tests on bitumen
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
evaluate Young Modulus, torsional strength, hardness and tensile strength of given specimens
determine the strength of coarse aggregates
find the compressive strength of concrete cubes and bricks
find stiffness of open coiled and closed coiled springs
determine the physical properties of given coarse aggregates, fine aggregates and cement samples
SEMESTER V
CE301 ENVIRONMENTAL ENGINEERING – II
Course objectives:
To learn the basics of sewage composition and its characteristics
To depict the information about various sewage treatment processes
To provide the adequate information on various disposal standards for industrial effluents
To study the information about air pollution and its effects
To understand the knowledge about solid waste generation and disposal methods
Course Content
Characteristics and composition of sewage-sampling-analysis- population equivalent - drainage in
buildings-plumbing systems for drainage
Primary treatment- Secondary treatment- biokinetics- Lagooning- sludge digestion-Tertiary treatment
Disposal standards- self purification of rivers- Streeter Phelps equation - oxygen sag curve
Toxic and hazardous wastes - equalization and neutralization- biological degradation- recycle and
reuse of waste effluents- treatment of industrial wastes- Dairy, Tannery, Petrochemical, Fertilizer,
textiles, Pulp and paper
Air pollution-effects- stack emission- automobile exhaust - control devices-solid waste Management -
EIA.
Note: Assignments include the designs and drawings of various wastewater treatment units.
References
1. Duggal, K.N., Elements of Environmental Engineering, S.Chand and Co., New Delhi, 2002.
2. Birdie, G.S. and Birdie, J.S., Water Supply and Sanitary Engineering, Dhanpat Rai and Sons,
New Delhi, 1992.
3. Metcalf and Eddy, Waste Water Engineering, Collection, Treatment and Disposal, Tata McGraw
Hill, Inc., New York, 2005.
4. Manual of Sewage and Sewage Treatment - CPHEEO, 1999.
18