Course Code : ECHO15
Course Title : NUMERICAL TECHNIQUES FOR MIC
Number of Credits 3
Prerequisites : ECPC25
(Course code)
Course Type : HO
Course learning Objective
 This subject will prepare the student to face the challenging problem of the most important
component of Research namely the numerical analysis.
Course content
Over view of Numerical Techniques for Microwave integrated Circuits: Introduction, Quasi Static
and Full wave Analysis, Outline if Finite element method, Integral Equation Technique, Planar
Circuit Analysis, Spectral Domain Approach, The Method of Lines, The Mode Matching Method,
The Transverse Resonance Technique
The Finite Element Method: Introduction, The Method of Weighted Residuals, The Variational
Method Using a Variational Expression, The Finite Element Method, Integral Formulation of
Problems, Antennas and Scattering from Conductors ,Waveguides-Hollow, Dielectric and Optical
Finite Difference in space and Time Matrix Computations. A Finite Element Computer Program for
Micro strips
Planar Circuit Analysis: Introduction, Planar Circuit Analysis’ Function Approach Impedance
Green’s Functions Contour Integral Approach Analysis of Planar Components of Composite
Configurations Planar Circuits with Anisotropic Spacing Media Applications of the Planar Circuits
Concept Summary
Spectral Domain Approach: Introduction, General Approach for Shielded Microstrip Lines, the
Admittance Approach Formulations for Slot lines, Fin lines, and Coplanar Waveguides Numerical
Computation
Transverse Resonance Technique: Introduction, Inhomogeneous Waveguides Uniform along a
Traverse Coordinate, Conventional Traverse Resonance Technique for Transversely Discontinuous
Waveguides, Generalized Transverse Resonance Technique for Transversely Discontinuous
Inhomogeneous Analysis of Discontinuities and Junctions by the Generalized Transverse Resonance
Technique, Examples of Computer Programs.
Text Book
1. T.Itoh, Numerical Techniques for Microwave Integrated Circuits., John Wiley and
sons,1989.
2. Cam Nguyen,Analysis Methods FOR RF,Microwave AND Millimeter_wave Planar
Transmission Line Structures, John Wiley & Sons, INC.2000.
Reference Books
1. Bharathi Bhat, Shiban K.Koul, Analysis, Design and Applications of Fin lines. Artech
House. 1987.
2.Recent literature in numerical techniques for microwave integrated circuits.
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able
CO1: bring awareness of the need for numerical analysis of M.I.C. And prepare to formulate all
popular numerical techniques of M.I.C.
CO2: make one formulate and write coding for Finite Element Method
CO3: prepare a person to be strong in the planar circuit Analysis
CO4: bring awareness of the most popular quasi state analysis Spectral Domain Techniques
CO5: prepare the student formulate and write coding for the Transverse Resonance Techniques
133 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015