Course Code : ECOE22
Course Title : TEXT DATA MINING
Number of Credits 3
Prerequisites : NONE
(Course code)
Course Type : OE
Course Learning Objective
 To understand the role played by text mining in Information retrieval and extraction.
Course content
Data, information and knowledge, Models of knowledge representation information retrieval and data
mining -relevance, association rules, and knowledge discovery. Conceptual models of an information
retrieval and knowledge discovery system.
Information extraction- prediction and evaluation-Textual information to numerical vectors - Types
and tokens, Document similarity Vector space models, TF-IDF weighting Indexing, Boolean search
Evaluation of IR systems Ranked retrieval Relevance feedback.
Text Categorization – Definition – Document Representation –Feature Selection - Decision Tree
Classifiers - Rule-based Classifiers - Probabilistic and Naive Bayes Classifiers - Linear Classifiers-
Clustering –Definition- Distance-based Algorithms- Word and Phrase-based Clustering -Semi-
Supervised Clustering - Transfer Learning. Naive Bayes - k Nearest Neigh bor (kNN) - Logistic
Regression-Decision Trees. Connectivity-based clustering and centroid-based clustering.
Probabilistic Models for Text Mining -Mixture Models - Stochastic Processes in Bayesian
Nonparametric Models - Graphical Models - Relationship Between Clustering, Dimension Reduction
and Topic Modelling - Latent Semantic Indexing - Probabilistic Latent Semantic Indexing -Latent
Dirichlet Allocation- Probabilistic Document Clustering and Topic Models - Probabilistic Models for
Information Extraction - Hidden Markov Models- Maximal Entropy Modelling - Maximal Entropy
Markov Models -Conditional Random Fields.
Visualization Approaches - Architectural Considerations - Visualization Techniques in Link Analysis
- Example- Mining Text Streams - Text Mining in Multimedia - Text Analytics in Social Media -
Opinion Mining and Sentiment Analysis - Document Sentiment Classification Aspect-Based
Sentiment Analysis - Opinion Spam Detection – Text Mining Applications and Case studies.
Text Books
1. Sholom Weiss, Nitin Indurkhya, Tong Zhang, Fred Damerau “The Text Mining Handbook:
Advanced Approaches in Analyzing Unstructured Data”, Springer, paperback 2010.
2. Ronen Feldman, James Sanger -“ The Text Mining Handbook: Advanced Approaches in
Analyzing Unstructured Data”-Cambridge University press, 2006.
Reference Books
1. Charu C. Aggarwal, Cheng Xiang Zhai, Mining Text Data, Springer; 2012.
Course Outcomes
Upon completion of the course, the students will be able to
CO1: know about the basics of text mining.
CO2: Identify the different features that can be mined from text and web documents.
CO3: learn about text classification.
CO4: learn to improve the efficiency of features and reduce the dimensionality.
CO5: understand the basics of recent advances in text classification.
91 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015