Course Code : ICPE44
Course Title : Industrial Electric Drives
Type of Course : PE
Prerequisites : ICPC11, ICPC12
Contact Hours : 42 (3 credits)
Course Assessment Methods : Continuous Assessment, End Assessment
Course Learning Objectives (CLO)
CLO1 To introduce to the students on the concept of employing power convertors for the
design of electric drives.
CLO2 To impart knowledge on the analysis of electric drive system dynamics.
CLO3 To apply the knowledge of drives to choose the right solid-state drive for a given
application.
CLO4 To impart knowledge on the design and development of control methods for electric
drive systems.
Course Content
Electric Drive System - Dynamics and steady state stability
Components of electrical Drives – electric machines, power converter, controllers - dynamics
of electric drive - torque equation - equivalent values of drive parameters - components of load
torques types of load - four quadrant operation of a motor –– steady state stability – load
equalization – classes of motor duty- determination of motor rating.
DC motor drives – dc motors and their performance (shunt, series, compound, permanent
magnet motor, universal motor, dc servomotor) – braking – regenerative, dynamic braking,
plugging –Transient analysis of separately excited motor – converter control of dc motors –
analysis of separately excited and series motor with 1-phase and 3-phase converters – dual
converter –analysis of chopper controlled dc drives – converter ratings and closed loop control
– transfer function of self, separately excited DC motors – linear transfer function model of
power converters – sensing and feeds back elements – current and speed loops, P, PI and
PID controllers – response comparison – simulation of converter and chopper fed DC drive.
Induction motor drives – stator voltage control of induction motor – torque-slip characteristics
– operation with different types of loads – operation with unbalanced source voltages and
single phasing – analysis of induction motor fed from non-sinusoidal voltage supply – stator
frequency control – variable frequency operation – V/F control, controlled current and
controlled slip operation – effect of harmonics and control of harmonics.
PWM inverter drives for Induction Motors – multi quadrant drives – rotor resistance control –
slip torque characteristic – torque equations, constant torque operation – slip power recovery
scheme – torque equation – torque slip characteristics – power factor – methods of improving
power factor – limited sub synchronous speed operation – super synchronous speed
operation.
Synchronous motor drives – speed control of synchronous motors – adjustable frequency
operation of synchronous motors – principles of synchronous motor control – voltage source
inverter drive with open loop control – self-controlled synchronous motor with electronic
commutation – self -controlled synchronous motor drive using load commutated thyristor
inverter.
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 157 | P age
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli
References
1. R. Krishnan, Electrical Motor Drives, PHI-2003.
2. G.K. Dubey, Power semiconductor-controlled drives, Prentice Hall- 2007.
3. G.K. Dubey, Fundamentals of Electrical Drives, Narosa- 2010.
4. S.A. Nasar, Boldea, Electrical Drives, Second Edition, CRC Press – 2017.
5. M. A. ElSharkawi, Fundamentals of Electrical Drives, Thomson Learning.2nd edition
2019.
6. W. Leohnard, Control of Electric Drives, Springer- 2019.
7. Murphy and Turnbull, Power Electronic Control of AC motors, Pergamon Press, 2021.
8. Vedam Subrahmaniam, Electric Drives, TMH-2nd edition 2017.
9. G. K. Dubey, Power semiconductor-controlled drives, Prentice Hall – 2007.
Course Outcomes (CO)
On completion of this course, the students will be able to,
CO1 Design suitable power electronic circuit for an electric drive system
CO2 Analyse the dynamics and steady state stability of motors
CO3 Select appropriate control method for the electric drives.
CO4 Select a suitable electric drive for a particular industrial application.
Course Outcome and Programme Outcome Mapping
0 1 2 1 2 3
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 1 1 O O O
O O O O O O O O O O O O S S S
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
CO1 3 3 3 3 3 - - - 2 2 2 3 3 3 -
CO2 3 3 3 3 3 - - - 2 2 2 3 3 3 -
CO3 3 3 3 3 3 - - - 2 2 2 3 3 3 -
CO4 2 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 3 3 3 2 2 2 1
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 158 | P age
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli