Course Code : ICIR14
Course Title : Professional Ethics
Type of Course : IR
Prerequisites : --
Contact Hours : 42 (3 credits)
Course Assessment : Continuous Assessments, End Assessment
Methods
Course Learning Objectives (CLO)
CLO1 To identify the core values that shape the ethical behavior of an engineer.
CLO2 To relate the code of ethics to social experimentation and to appreciate the rights
of others.
CLO3 To understand the difference between moral standards and professional ethics.
CLO4 To evaluate the need for computer ethics.
Course Content
Introduction to Ethics, Moral and Values
Occupation – Profession – Professionalism - Concept of Ethics - need for Ethics in
Engineering - impact of unethical conducts on society and professional - Importance of Moral
and Value in profession – core values, Hollow values and its impact - Work Ethics – Styles of
Ethics -Service Learning, components, reflections, evaluation and its assessment – Civic
Virtue - Respect for Others in Engineering Work Place– Living Peacefully – Caring and
Sharing in engineering –- General Etiquette for students
Ethical Theories and Engineering
Kohlberg’s theory – Gilligan’s theory- utilitarianism and Cost Benefit analysis – Duty Ethics
and Right Ethics - Its Impact on Engineering Practices – Virtue Ethics and Personal vs.
Corporate Morality - moral autonomy –– Consensus and Controversy - Moral issues in
Engineering – types of inquiry – moral dilemmas – Ethical Problem-Solving Techniques -
Types of Issues in Engineering and Ethical Problem Solving - line-drawing technique, flow
charting method with examples and applications - conflict problem solving methods - Models
of Professional Roles and Professionalism
Engineering Projects and Expected Traits
Engineering as experimentation – engineers as responsible experimenters – Codes of ethics
- Research ethics– Industrial Standard – purpose, types and use - Balanced outlook on law –
Collegiality and loyalty–respect for authority in industry–collective bargaining–Confidentiality–
conflicts of interest and conflicting interest
Safety, Responsibilities and Rights
Safety and risk–definition-subjective nature and depending factors – types of risks – types of
safety in industry- Risk benefit analysis and reducing risk – Govt. Regulator’s approach to risks
- the challenger case study – the three mile island and Chernobyl case studies and Bhopal
UCC accident – causes, ethical and safety issues – Accidents and Engineer’s role - Designing
for Safety - Threat of Nuclear Power – depletion of ozone, greenery effects – occupational
crime – professional rights – employees’ rights – whistle- blowing – condition and types of
whistle blowing - Confidentiality and Proprietary Information - Intellectual Property Rights (IPR)
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 32 | Pa ge
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli
Ethics in Present Scenario and Engineers Role
Multinational corporations – Business ethics – Environmental ethics – computer ethics – Role
in Technological Development – Ethics for Weapons development – engineers as managers
– consulting engineers – engineers as expert witnesses and advisors – Leadership - sample
code of conduct ethics like ASME, ASCE, IEEE, Institution of Engineers (India), Indian Institute
of Materials Management, Institution of Electronics and Telecommunication Engineers (IETE),
India, etc.,
References
1. Mika Martin and Roland Scinger, Ethics in Engineering, Pearson Education/Prentice
Hall, 3rd Edition, 2017
2. Govindarajan M., Natarajan S., Senthil Kumar V. S., Engineering Ethics, Prentice Hall
of India, New Delhi, 2004
3. Charles D. Fleddermann, Ethics in Engineering, Pearson Education/Prentice Hall, New
Jersey, 2004 (Indian Reprint).
4. Charles E. Harris, Michael S. Protchard and Michael J. Rabins, Engineering Ethics –
Concept and Cases, Wadsworth Thompson Learning, United States, 2000 (Indian
Reprint now available). Concepts and Cases, Thompson Learning, 2000
5. John R. Boatright, Ethics and Conduct of Business, Pearson Education, New Delhi,
2003
6. Edmund G. Seebauer and Robert L. Barry, Fundamentals of Ethics for Scientists and
Engineers, Oxford University Press, 2001
Course Outcomes (CO)
On completion of this course, the students will be able to
CO1 Understand the basic perception of profession, professional ethics, and various
moral and social issues.
CO2 Demonstrate awareness of their rights and responsibility as engineers.
CO3 Acquire knowledge about various roles of engineers in a variety of global issues.
CO4 Thrive in competitive professional spaces with integrity and responsibility.
CO5 Learn to be empathetic and assertive leaders in their respective profession.
Course Outcome and Programme Outcome Mapping
0 1 2 1 2 3
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 1 1 O O O
O O O O O O O O O O O O S S S
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
CO1 1 1 1 2 1 3 2 3 3 2 3 3 1 2 3
CO2 1 1 1 1 1 3 2 3 3 2 2 3 1 2 3
CO3 2 1 1 1 1 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 2 3 3
CO4 1 1 2 2 2 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 1 3 3
CO5 1 1 2 2 1 3 2 3 3 3 3 3 1 2 3
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 33 | Pa ge
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli