CE306 Concrete Structures-II 3 0 2 4
CE306 CONCRETE STRUCTURES – II
Course objectives:
To understand the design concept of various structures and detailing of reinforcements
To understand the design of underground and elevated liquid retaining structures
To study the design of material storage structures
To know the effect of temperature on concrete structures
To study the design of bridges subjected to IRC loading
Course Content
Earth Retaining structures - Retaining walls- types - cantilever and counterfort - design - drainage and
other construction details. Liquid Retaining structure - Water tanks - types - square, rectangular, circular
- Design of underground and elevated tanks - design of staging - spherical & conical roof for circular
26
Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
tanks. Material storage structures - Determination of lateral pressure on side walls of bunker -
Rankine's theory - design of bunker - design of circular silo using Jansen's theory. Environmental
Structures - Chimneys - Principles and Design - Design of long columns. Transportation structures -
Bridges - Slab bridge - Design of single span slab bridge - Tee beam bridge - Design of Tee beam
bridge with stiffness - Tee beam bridge with cross girders
Note: Assignments include the design and drawings of various RCC structures.
References
1. Vazirani, V.N., and Ratwani, Concrete Structures, Vol. IV, Khanna Publishers, New Delhi, 1995.
2. Dayaratnam, P., Design of Reinforced Concrete Structures, Oxford & IBH Publishers & Co., New
Delhi, 2005.
3. Victor, D.J., Essentials of Bridge Engineering, Oxford & IBH Publishers Co., Newdelhi, 1991.
4. IS456-2006 Code of practice for Plain and reinforced concrete code of practice.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
apply the concepts of liquid retaining structures
design material storage structures using various theories
apply the concepts of environmental and transportation structures
demonstrate the detailing of reinforcement
draw the various RCC structures