Course Code : ICPE41
Course Title : Process Modelling and Optimization
Type of Course : PE
Prerequisites : ICPC18, ICPC21
Contact Hours : 42 (3 credits)
Course Assessment Methods : Continuous Assessment, End Assessment
Course Learning Objectives (CLO)
CLO1 To impart knowledge with an emphasis on control system design in the current
computer era.
CLO2 To teach the interdisciplinary necessity of linear algebra, control theory, and
computer science.
CLO3 To demonstrate that control problems in practice demand efficient algorithms
CLO4 To discuss about algorithms useful for practicing engineers for easy
implementation on a range of computers.
Course Content
Review of Linear Algebra – Vector spaces, Orthogonality, Matrices, Vector and Matrix Norms,
Kronecker Product.
Numerical Linear Algebra – Floating point numbers and errors in computations, Conditioning,
Efficiency, Stability, and Accuracy, LU Factorization, Numerical solution of the Linear system
Ax = b, QR factorization, Orthogonal projections, Least Squares problem, Singular Value
Decomposition, Canonical forms obtained via orthogonal transformations.
Control Systems Analysis – Linear State-space models and solutions of the state equations,
Controllability, Observability, Stability, Inertia, and Robust Stability, Numerical solutions and
conditioning of Lyapunov and Sylvester equations.
Control Systems Design – Feedback stabilization, Eigen value assignment, Optimal Control,
Quadratic optimization problems, Algebraic Riccati equations, Numerical methods and
conditioning, State estimation and Kalman filter.
Large scale Matrix computations, Some Selected Software – MATLAB, MATHEMATICA,
SCILAB.
References
1. B.N. Datta, Numerical Methods for Linear Control Systems, Academic
Press/Elsevier, 2005 (Low cost Indian edition available including CD ROM).
2. G.H. Golub and C.F. Van Loan, Matrix Computations, 4th Edition, John Hopkins
University Press, 2007 (Low cost Indian edition available from Hindustan Book Agency).
3. A. Quarteroni, F. Saleri, Scientific Computing with MATLAB, Springer Verlag, 2003.
4. www.scilab.org
5. G. Strang, Linear Algebra and Learning from Data, Wellesley-Cambridge Press, 2019
6. Jitendra R. Raol, Ramakalyan Ayyagari, Control Systems – Classical, Modern and
AI-Based Approaches, CRC Press Taylor and Francis Group
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 151 | P age
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli
Course Outcomes (CO)
On completion of this course, the students will be able to,
CO1 Acquire skills and numerical solutions of state equations and frequency response
computations.
CO2 Develop numerical algorithms for evaluation of controllability, observability, and
stability.
CO3 Acquire skills in numerical solutions for conditioning of Lyapunov and algebraic
Riccati equation
CO4 Obtain large-scale solutions of control problems.
Course Outcome and Programme Outcome Mapping
0 1 2 1 2 3
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 1 1 O O O
O O O O O O O O O O O O S S S
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
CO1 3 3 3 3 3 - - - 2 2 2 3 3 3 -
CO2 3 3 3 3 3 - - - 2 2 2 3 3 3 -
CO3 3 3 3 3 3 - - - 2 2 2 3 3 3 -
CO4 3 3 3 3 3 - - - 2 2 2 3 3 3 -
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 152 | P age
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli