Course Code : ECOE19
Course Title : ARM SYSTEM ARCHITECTURE
Number of Credits 3
Prerequisites : NONE
(Course code)
Course Type : OE
Course learning Objective
 The objective of this course is to give the students a thorough exposure to ARM architecture
and make the students to learn the ARM programming & Thumb programming models.
Course Content
RISC machine. ARM programmer’s model. ARM Instruction Set. Assembly level language
programming. Development tools.
ARM organization. ARM instruction execution. ARM implementation. ARM coprocessor interface.
Flynn's Taxonomy, SIMD and Vector Processors, Vector Floating Point Processor (VFP), VFP and
ARM interactions, vector operation.
Floating point architecture. Expressions. Conditional statements. Loops. Functions and procedures.
Run time environment. Interrupt response. Interrupt processing. Interrupt Handling schemes,
Examples of Interrupt Handlers.
Thumb programmer’s model. Thumb Instruction set. Thumb implementation. AMBA Overview,
Typical AMAB Based Microcontroller, AHB bus features, AHB Bus transfers, APB bus transfers and
APB Bridge.
Memory hierarchy. Architectural support for operating system. Memory size and speed. Cache
memory management. Operating system. ARM processor chips. Features of Raspberry Pi and its
applications.
Text Books
1. S. Furber, “ARM System Architecture”, Addison-Wesley, 1996.
2. Sloss, D.Symes & C.Wright, “ARM system Developer’s guide-Designing and Optimizing
System Software”, Elsevier.2005.
Reference Books
1. Technical reference manual for ARM processor cores, including Cortex, ARM 11, ARM 9 &
ARM 7 processor families.
2. User guides and reference manuals for ARM software development and modelling tools.
David Seal, ARM Architecture Reference Manual, Addison-Wesley.
3. The Definitive Guide to ARM® Cortex®-M3 and Cortex®-M4 Processors, Third Edition by
Joseph Yiu, Elsevier 2015
4. Recent literature in ARM System Architecture.
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able to
CO1: understand the programmer’s model of ARM processor and test the assembly
level programming.
CO2: analyze various types of coprocessors and design suitable co-processor interface to ARM
processor.
CO3: analyze floating point processor architecture and its architectural support for higher level
language.
CO4: become aware of the Thumb mode of operation of ARM.
CO5: identify the architectural support of ARM for operating system and analyze the
function of memory Management unit of ARM.
88 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015