Course Code : ECHO32
Course Title : Error Control Coding
Number of Credits : 3
Course Type : HO
Course Objective
 To explain the importance of modern coding techniques in the design of digital
communication systems.
Course Content
Review of modern algebra. Galois fields. Linear block codes; encoding and decoding. Cyclic codes.
Non-binary codes.
Convolutional codes. Generator sequences. Structural properties. ML decoding. Viterbi decoding.
Sequential decoding.
Modulation codes. Trellis coded modulation. Lattice type Trellis codes. Geometrically uniform trellis
codes. Decoding of modulation codes.
Turbo codes. Turbo decoder. Interleaver. Turbo decoder. MAP and log MAP decoders. Iterative turbo
decoding. Optimum decoding of turbo codes.
Space-time codes. MIMO systems. Space-time codes. MIMO systems. Space-time block codes
(STBC) – decoding of STBC.
Text Books
1. S.Lin & D.J.Costello, “Error Control Coding (2/e)”, Pearson, 2005.
2. B.Vucetic & J.Yuan, “Turbo codes”, Kluwer, 2000
Reference Books
1. C.B.Schlegel & L.C.Perez, “Trellis and Turbo Coding”, Wiley,2004.
2. B.Vucetic & J.yuan, “Space-Time Coding”, Wiley, 2003.
3. R.Johannaesson & K.S.Zigangirov, “Fundamentals of Convolutional Coding”, Universities
Press, 2001.
4. Recent literature in Error Control Coding.
Course Outcome
Students are able to
CO1: understand the need for error correcting codes in data communication and storage systems.
CO2: identify the major classes of error detecting and error correcting codes and how they are
used in practice. Construct codes capable of correcting a specified number of errors.
CO3: use the mathematical tools for designing error correcting codes, including finite fields.
CO4: explain the operating principles of block codes, cyclic codes, convolution codes, modulation
codes, Turbo codes etc.
CO5: design an error correcting code for a given application.
151 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015