Course Code : ECMI28
Course Title : MICROWAVE ELECTRONICS
Number of Credits 3
Prerequisites : ECMI24
(Course code)
Course Type : MI
Course Learning Objective
 To impart knowledge on basics of microwave electron beam devices and their applications in X
band frequency.
Course Content
Limitations of conventional vacuum tubes, Klystrons: Re-entrant cavities, Two cavity klystron,
Velocity modulation process, Bunching process ,Power output and efficiency; Multi-cavity klystron ,
Reflex klystron-Velocity modulation process, Mode Characteristics ,Electronic admittance spiral.
Travelling-wave tubes: Slow-wave structures, Helix TWT- Amplification process, Convection current,
Wave modes and gain; coupled cavity TWT, Backward wave oscillator.
Crossed -field devices: Magnetrons- Principle of operation, characteristics, Hull cut-off condition;
Carcinotron, Gyrotron.
Microwave transistors and FETs: Microwave bipolar transistors-Physical structures, characteristics,
Power-frequency limitations; Microwave tunnel diode, Microwave unipolar transistor – Physical
structure, principle of operation, characteristics, High electron-mobility transistors.
Transferred electron and Avalanche transit-time devices: Gunn diode, Gunn diode as an oscillator.
IMPATT, TRAPATT and BARITT.
Text Books
1. S.Y.Liao, “Microwave Devices and Circuits (3/e)”, PHI, 2005.
2. R. F. Soohoo, “Microwave Electronics”, Wesley publication, 1971.
Reference Books
1. R.E.Collin, “Foundations for Microwave Engineering (2/e)”, Wiley India, 2007.
2. D.M.Pozar,” Microwave Engineering (3/e)”, Wiley India, 2009.
3. K C Gupta, Indian Institute of Technology, Kanpur,” Microwaves”, Wiley Eastern Limited,
1995.
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able
CO1: Apply the basic knowledge of waveguide and microwave resonator circuits.
CO2: Asses the methods used for generation and amplification of the microwave power.
CO3: Distinguish between the linear and cross field electron beam microwave tubes.
CO4: Critically analyze the operating principles and performances of the microwave
semiconductor devices.
CO5: Identify the suitable microwave power sources of given specification for the selected
application.
120 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015