Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
3. Arora, K. R. Surveying Vol. III, Standard Book House, 1996.
4. Satheesh Gopi. Advanced Surveying, Pearson Education, 2007.
5. Satheesh Gopi. The Global Positioning System and Surveying using GPS, Tata McGraw, 2005.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
apply advanced surveying techniques in different fields of civil engineering
select the advanced surveying technique which is best suited for a work
apply total station and EDM in distance measurement and traversing
demonstrate the principles of the earth surface, its projections and different coordinates
involved in map making
apply GPS in transportation engineering, structural engineering and land use planning
CE463 STEEL-CONCRETE COMPOSITE STRUCTURES
Course Objectives:
To introduce the concept of composite construction and their applications in engineering
To discuss shear connector types, degree of shear connector, interaction and their strength
To introduce design of composite beams under propped and un-propped condition
To introduce design of different types of composite deck slabs
To discuss effects of temperature, shrinkage and creep and cyclic loading on composite
sections
Course Content
Introduction – types – advantages – comparison – applications - limit states of composite sections –
introduction to plastic analysis – mechanism of composite members
Shear connectors – types of shear connectors – degree of shear connection – partial and complete
shear connections – strength of shear connectors – experimental evaluation of shear connectors.
Analysis and design of composite beams without profile sheet - propped condition – un-propped
condition – deflection - design of partial shear connection
Design of composite beam with profile sheet – propped and un-propped condition – deflection of
composite beams –design of partial shear connection
Introduction – Composite slabs – profiled sheeting – sheeting parallel to span – sheeting perpendicular
to span – analysis and design of composite floor system.
References
1. Johnson R.P., “Composite Structures of Steel and Concrete”’ Volume-I, Black Well Scientific
Publication, U.K., 1994
2. Teaching Resources for “Structural Steel Desgin”. Vol.2 of 3, Institute of Steel Development and
Growth (INSDAG), 2000
3. Narayanan R., “Composite Steel Structures – Advances, Design and construction, Elsevier, Applied
Science, U.K., 1987
4. Owens, G.W & Knowels, P., Steel Designers Manual,” (fifth edition), Steel Concrete Institute (U.K),
Oxford Blackwell Scientific Publication, 1992.
5. IS 11384 – 1985 Indian Standard Code of Practice for Composite Construction in Structural Steel
and Concrete, Bureau of Indian Standards, New Delhi
48