Course Code : ECHO14
Course Title : RF CIRCUITS
Number of Credits 3
Prerequisites : NONE
(Course code)
Course Type : HO
Course learning Objective
 To impart knowledge on basics of IC design at RF frequencies.
Course content
Characteristics of passive IC components at RF frequencies – interconnects, resistors, capacitors,
inductors and transformers – Transmission lines. Noise – classical two-port noise theory, noise
models for active and passive components High frequency amplifier design – zeros as bandwidth
enhancers, shunt-series amplifier, fdoublers ,neutralization and uni-lateralization
Low noise amplifier design – LNA topologies, power constrained noise optimization, linearity and
large signal performance
Mixers – multiplier-based mixers, subsampling mixers, diode-ring mixers
RF power amplifiers – Class A, AB, B, C, D, E and F amplifiers, modulation of power amplifiers,
linearity considerations
Oscillators & synthesizers – describing functions, resonators, negative resistance oscillators,
synthesis with static moduli, synthesis with dithering moduli, combination synthesizers – phase noise
considerations.
Text Books
1. T.homas H. Lee, “The Design of CMOS Radio-Frequency Integrated Circuits”, 2nd ed.,
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press,2004.
2. B.Razavi, “RF Microelectronics”, 2nd Ed., Prentice Hall, 1998.
Reference Books
1. A.A. Abidi, P.R. Gray, and R.G. Meyer, eds., “Integrated Circuits for Wireless
Communications”, New York: IEEE Press,1999.
2. R. Ludwig and P. Bretchko, “RF Circuit Design, Theory and Applications”, Pearson,2000.
3. Mattuck,A., “Introduction to Analysis”,Prentice-Hall,1998.
4. Recent literature in RF Circuits.
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able
CO1: Understand the Noise models for passive components and noise theory
CO2: Analyze the design of a high frequency amplifier
CO3: Appreciate the different LNA topologies & design techniques
CO4: Distinguish between different types of mixers
CO5: Analyse the various types of synthesizers, oscillators and their characteristics.
132 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015