Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
CE457 STRUCTURAL DYNAMICS
Course Objectives:
To introduce the concepts of dynamic systems
To study the dynamic response of SDOF
To study the dynamic response of MDOF
To introduce the continuous systems subjected to different types of dynamic loads
To learn free and forced vibrations response of structural systems
Course Content
Dynamic analysis - Elements of vibratory systems and simple Harmonic Motion- Mathematical models
of SDOF systems - Principle of Virtual displacements - Evaluation of damping resonance.
Fourier series expression for loading - (blast or earthquake) - Duhamel’s integral - Numerical evaluation
- Expression for generalized system properties - vibration analysis Rayleigh’s method - Rayleigh - Ritz
method.
Differential equation of motion - Beam flexure including shear deformation and rotatory inertia -
Vibration analysis using finite element method for beams and frames
Evaluation of structural property matrices - Natural vibration - Solution of the eigen value problem -
Iteration due to Holzer and Stodola
Idealization of multi-storeyed frames - analysis to blast loading - Deterministic analysis of earthquake
response - lumped SDOF system - Design of earthquake resistant structures.
References
1. Mario Paz, Structural Dynamics, CBS, Publishers, 1987.
2. Roy R Craig, Jr., Structural Dynamics, John Wiley & Sons, 1981.
3. A.K. Chpora “Dynamics of Structures Theory and Application to Earthquake Engineering” Pearson
Education, 2001.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
apply the concepts of dynamic systems
identify, formulate and solve dynamic response of SDOF
identify, formulate and solve dynamic response of MDOF
analyze continuous systems subjected to different types of dynamic loads
identify, formulate and solve free and forced vibrations response of structural systems
CE458 FINITE ELEMENT METHOD
Course objectives:
To study the strain –displacement and linear constitutive relation
To understand the numerical techniques applied in FEM
Establishment of element stiffness and load vector
To study about the 2-D isoparametric concepts
To analyze the 2-D frame elements using FEM techniques
43
Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
Course Content
Differential equilibrium equations - strain displacement relation - linear constitutive relation - special
cases - Principle of stationary potential energy - application to finite element methods - Some numerical
techniques in finite element Analysis
Displacement models - convergence requirements. Natural coordinate systems - Shape function.
Interpolation function. Linear and quadratic elements - Lagrange & Serendipity elements. Strain
displacement matrix - element stiffness matrix and nodal load vector
Two dimensional isoparametric elements - Four noded quadrilateral elements - triangular elements.
Computation of stiffness matrix for isoparametric elements - numerical integration (Gauss quadrature)
Convergence criteria for isoparametric elements.
Assemblage of elements – Direct stiffness method. Special characteristics of stiffness matrix -
Boundary condition & reaction - Gauss elimination and LDLT decomposition. Basic steps in finite
element analysis.
Analysis of framed Structures: 2D – truss element - 2D - beam element. Analysis of plate bending-
displacement functions - plate bending Elements. Plane stress and plane strain analysis: Triangular
elements - Rectangular elements
References
1. Krishnamoorthy, C.S, Finite Element Analysis Theory & Programming, McGraw- Hill, 1995.
2. Desai C.S and Abel, J.F., Introduction to the finite element Method, Affiliated East west Press Pvt.
Ltd. New Delhi 2000.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
demonstrate the differential equilibrium equations and their relationship
apply numerical methods to FEM
demonstrate the displacement models and load vectors
compute the stiffness matrix for isoperimetric elements
analyze plane stress and plane strain problems
CE459 MODELS FOR AIR AND WATER QUALITY
Course objectives:
To introduce the mathematical models and the modeling approach to water quality
to present the mass balance basis for water quality models, simplified water quality models for
streams and rivers, lakes and reservoirs for conservative and non-conservative materials
to describe the various models for microbial growth and limitations
to address the simple air quality models for point and line sources
to review the simple models for estuaries
Course Content
Introduction to Mathematical Models: Modeling approaches to water quality - classification of models
Mathematical models for water quality - model development, calibration and verification - cost: benefit
analysis using models, Model requirements and limitations. D.O. Models for Streams: Dissolved oxygen
model for streams - sources and sinks of dissolved oxygen
44
Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
Estimation of system parameters - Streeter - Phelps model - oxygen 'sag' curve - determination of
deoxygenation and reaeration coefficients - Benthal oxygen demand - mass transport mechanisms -
Advective and diffusive mass transport
Models by O'connor, Dobbins and Thomann. Models for Estuary and Lakes: Physical chemical and
biological processes in estuaries - water quality distribution in estuaries - modeling estuaries and lakes
for water quality - temperature models for lakes and rivers
Models for microorganisms decay, nitrogen and phytoplankton. Air quality models: Micrometeorological
processes, wind rose, dispersion, coefficients and stability classes, Gaussian and dispersion model,
Regional air quality models,
References
1. Chapra, Steven C., "Surface water quality modeling", McGraw Hill Book Company, New York,
1997.
2. Gilbert M. Masters, "Introduction to Environmental Engineering and Science", 2nd Edition, Prentice
Hall, 1998.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
evaluate the physical, chemical and biological water quality which is essential for the abatement
of water pollution
predict the quality of water and air through modeling
recognize the risks of disposal of treated wastewater into the river
design sound and sustainable water and air models under specified conditions
CE460 TRANSPORTATION PLANNING
Course objectives:
To know about the process and concepts of transportation planning
To study about trip generation
To study about trip distribution
To study about modal split analysis
To study about trip assignment
Course Content
Transportation Planning Process and Concepts- Role of transportation - Transportation problems -
Urban travel characteristics - Concept of travel demand - Demand function - demand estimation -
Sequential, recursive and simultaneous processes
Trip Generation Analysis - Zoning - Types and sources of data - Expansion factors - Accuracy checks -
Trip generation models - Zonal models - Household models - Category analysis - Trip attractions of
work centers.
Trip Distribution Analysis - Trip distribution models - Growth factor models - Gravity models -
Opportunity models.
Mode Split Analysis - Mode split Models - Mode choice behavior, Competing modes, Mode split curves,
Probabilistic models.
45
Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
Traffic Assignment - Route split analysis: Elements of transportation networks, Nodes and links -
minimum path trees - all-or-nothing assignment - Multipath assignment - Capacity restraint.
References
1. Hutchinson B.G., Principles of Urban Transportation System Planning, McGraw Hill, 2007.
2. Bruton M.J., Introduction to Transportation Planning, Hutchinson, London, 1992.
3. C. Jotin Khisty, B. Kent Lall, Transportation Engineering, Prentice Hall of India, 2002.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
apply the principles of the transportation planning process and demand estimation
analyse the trip production and trip attraction models
analyse the growth factor, gravity and opportunity models
apply the mode choice behaviour and mode split models
apply the shortest path models for route assignment
CE461 PAVEMENT ANALYSIS AND DESIGN
Course objectives:
To study about the types and components of pavements
To learn about the stresses in flexible pavements and equivalent single wheel load
To study the design of flexible pavements
To learn about the stresses in rigid pavements
To study the design of rigid pavements
Course Content
Pavements - Types and Component - Factors affecting Design and Performance of Pavements,
Comparison between Highway and Airport pavements - Functions and Significance of Sub grade
properties
Stresses in Flexible Pavements - Stresses and Deflections in Homogeneous Masses - Burmister's 2-
layer, 3-layer Theories - Wheel Load Stresses, ESWL of Multiple Wheels Repeated Loads and EWL
factors
Flexible Pavement Design - Empirical - Semi-empirical and Theoretical Approaches; Principles and
procedure, design, Advantages and Applications of different Pavement Design Methods - Stresses in
Rigid pavements - Types of Stresses and Causes - Factors influencing the Stresses, General
conditions in Rigid Pavement Analysis, ESWL, Wheel Load Stresses, Warping Stresses, Friction
Stresses, Combined Stresses
Rigid Pavement Design - Types of Joints in Cement Concrete Pavements and their Functions, Joint
Spacings, Design of Slab Thickness, Design of Joint Details for Longitudinal Joints, Contraction Joints
and Expansion Joints, IRC Method of Design
References
1. Yoder and Witezak, Principles of pavement design¸ John Wiley and sons, 1975
2. Yang, Design of functional pavements, Mc Graw -Hill, 2004.
3. IRC: 58 - 2002, Guidelines for the Design of Plain Jointed Rigid Pavements for Highways
46