Course Code : ECPC24
Course Title : RF AND MICROWAVE ENGINEERING
Number of Credits 3
Prerequisites : ECPC16
(Course code)
Course Type : PC
Course Learning Objective
 To impart knowledge on basics of microwave electron beam devices and their applications in X
band frequency and introduces the essential Microwave Circuit Theory and the design aspects of
Microwave Integrated Circuit components.
Course Content
Limitations of Conventional tubes, two cavity Klystron Amplifier, Velocity modulation and Bunching
Process, Reflex klystron oscillator –Multi cavity Klystron-Travelling Wave Tube amplifier- Magnetron
Working principle and modes of Operation.
Two port Network theory- Scattering Matrix formulation- Passive microwave devices: E and H
junction-hybrid junctions, terminations, bends, corners, attenuators, phase changers, directional
couplers, Circulator, Isolator
Transferred Electron and Avalanche Devices: Gunn Diode, read diode, IMPATT, TRAPATT
and BARIT
Design and Realization of MIC Components: Basics of Micro strip and Strip line – 3 dB Hybrid Design,
Rat Race Coupler, Power Dividers
Microwave Measurements: Introduction to microwave Bench Set-up, Frequency, Wavelength, VSWR
and Impedance Measurement. Network Analyzer, Spectrum analyzer.
Text Books
1. I.J.Bahl & P.Bhartia, “Microwave Solid state Circuit Design”, Wiley, 2003.
2. S.Y.Liao, “Microwave Devices and Circuits (3/e)”, PHI, 2005
3. D.M.Pozar, “Microwave Engineering (2/e)”, Wiley, 2004.
Reference Books
1. A. Das, “Microwave Engineering”, Tata McGraw Hill, 2000
2. B.Bhat, S. K. Koul,”Stripline like transmission lines for Microwave Integrated Circuits”, New
age International Pvt.Ltd. Publishers 2007.
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able
CO1: Apply the basic knowledge of waveguide and microwave resonator circuits.
CO2: Understand the methods used for generation and amplification of the microwave power.
CO3: Distinguish between the linear and cross field electron beam microwave tubes.
CO4: Learn the basics of S parameters and use them in describing the components
CO5: Expose to the Microwave Measurements Principle
31 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015