CE309 Hydraulic Machinery 3 0 0 3
CE309 HYDRAULIC MACHINERY
Course objectives:
To understand the application of momentum principle of impact of jets on plane and curved
surfaces
21
Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
To study types of centrifugal Pumps, work done and efficiency of the different types centrifugal
pumps and also study about performance of pumps & characteristic curves
To study about specific speed and performance characteristics of different types of turbines
To study about hydroelectric power plant and estimation of hydropower potential
To explain the concept of positive displacement
Course Content
Principles of impingement of jets - Impact of jet on a stationary vertical plate, stationary inclined plate,
stationary curved plate, hinged plate, moving vertical and inclined plates, moving curved plate and on
series of moving flat and curved vanes fixed on the periphery of circular rim.
Turbines - classification- impulse turbines - Pelton wheel - Reaction turbines - Francis and Kaplan
Turbines - draft tubes - Governing of a Francis turbine - Performance of turbines - specific speed and
their significance.
Centrifugal pump - description and working - Head, discharge and efficiency of a centrifugal pump -
pressure rise in the pump - minimum starting speed of a pump - cavitation - priming - multistage
pumps - characteristic curves.
Reciprocating pump - Description and working - types - discharge and slip - power required to
drive the pump - Indicator diagram - Air vessel - work done against friction with and without air
vessels.
Working principle and use of the following hydraulic pumps and machines - Deep well pumps -
submersible and jet pumps, special pumps - Gear pump - screw pump, sewage pump, miscellaneous
machines - Hydraulic press - hydraulic accumulator - Hydraulic ram.
References
1. Bansal, R.K., A text book of Fluid Mechanics and Hydraulic Machines, Laxmi Publications (P) Ltd.,
New Delhi, 2002.
2. Nagaratnam, S., Fluid Machines and Systems, Tata McGraw Hill, 1989.
3. Khurmi, R.S., Text Book of Hydraulics and Hydraulic Machine, S. Chand & Co, 2003.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
calculate forces and work done by a jet on fixed or moving plate and curved plates
apply the working principles of Impulse and Reaction turbines
select the type of turbine required with reference to available head of water and discharge
determine the characteristics of centrifugal pump
apply the working principles of the Reciprocating pump