Course Code : ECOE17
Course Title : OPERATING SYSTEMS
Number of Credits 3
Prerequisites : NONE
(Course code)
Course Type : OE
Course learning Objective
 To expose the principles and practice of operating system design and to illustrate the current
design practices using DOS and UNIX operating systems.
Course content
Types of operating systems, Different views of the operating system, Principles of Design and
Implementation. The process and threads. System programmer’s view of processes, Operating
system's views of processes, Operating system services for process management. Process scheduling,
Schedulers, Scheduling algorithms. Overview of Linux operating system.
Interprocess synchronization, Mutual exclusion algorithms, Hardware support, Semaphores,
Concurrent programming using semaphores.
Conditional critical regions, Monitors, Inter process communication: Messages, Pipes. Deadlocks:
Characterization. Prevention. Avoidance. Detection and recovery. Combined approach to deadlock
handling.
Contiguous allocation. Static and dynamic partitioned memory allocation. Segmentation.
Non- contiguous allocation. Paging, Hardware support, Virtual Memory.
Need for files. File abstraction. File naming. File system organization. File system optimization.
Reliability. Security and protection. I/O management and disk scheduling. Recent trends and
developments.
Text Books
1. Gary: Operating Systems- A modern Perspective, (2/e), Addison Wesley, 2000.
2. M.Milenkovic: Operating systems, Concepts and Design, McGraw Hill, 1992.
Reference Books
1. C. Crowley: Operating Systems, Irwin, 1997.
2. J.l. Peterson & A.S. Chatz: Operating System Concepts, Addison Wesley, 1985.
3. W. Stallings: Operating Systems, (2/e), Prentice Hall, 1995.
4. Mattuck,A., Introduction to Analysis,Prentice-Hall,1998.
5. Recent literature in Operating Systems.
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able
CO1:.Understand the different types of Operating systems and scheduling algorithms.
CO2: Understand the synchronization algorithms and semaphores.
CO3: Appreciate the inter process communication and deadlock handling.
CO4: Critically evaluate the different memory allocation techniques.
CO5: Appreciate the importance of file system organization, I/O management and disk
scheduling.
85 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015