Course Code : ECPE32
Course Title : DIGITAL SIGNAL PROCESSING FOR WIRELESS
COMMUNICATION
Number of Credits 3
Prerequisites : ECPC15
(Course code)
Course Type : PE
Course Learning Objectives
 The subject aims to make the students to understand the usage of various signal processing
techniques used for wireless communication
Course Content
Mathematical model of the Time-varying wireless channel: Multi-path model, Coherence time and
Doppler spread, Coherence frequency and Delay spread. Relationship between the time-varying
impulse response of the Base band and Bandpass Transmission. Discrete Complex Base band time
varying channel model for wireless communication. Computation of probability of error for Flat
fading Rayleigh channel, Flat fading Rician model and single tap channel with known filter co-
efficient.
Autocorrelation and the Spectral density computation of base band and the band pass signal. Sampling
and reconstruction of W.S.S. random process. Spectral density computation for PSK, QPSK, FSK and
MSK. Relationship between Base band and band pass random process using Hilbert transformation.
Periodogram, Barlett method, Welch, Blackman and Tuckey methods of estimating spectrum of the
modulated signal.
Multiple input Multiple output (MIMO) System model, Zero forcing receiver, LMMSE receiver,
Matched filter receiver. Optimal precoding and combining, Spatial multiplexing using Decoupling of
MIMO system. Massive MIMO, Power scaling, Orthogonality, Multi-cell Multi user MIMO, Pilot
contamination and Rate scaling.
Orthogonal Frequency division Multiplexing (OFDM) Multicarrier modulation (MCM) , MCM
transmission/Received signal, MCM-IFFT/FFT Processing, MCM-Cyclic prefix, Spectrum of OFDM
transmission, MIMO-OFDM System model, BER of OFDM and MIMO-OFDM
5G Technology: Non-orthgonal multiple access, Spatial Modulation, Filter bank multi-carrier
systems (FBMC), FBMC-OQAM System model, MIMO-FBMC Signal processing, Full Duplex
Radio, Self-interference, Hybrid cancellation, mm wave MIMO Channel Modeling and Estimation.
Textbooks
1. D. Tse and P.Viswanath, “Fundamentals of Wireless Communication”, Cambridge
university press, 2005
2. A. Goldsmith, “Wireless Communications”, Cambridge University Press,2005
3. E.S.Gopi, “Digital signal processing for wireless communication using Matlab’’, Springer,
2016
ReferenceBooks
1. T.S.Rappaport, “Wireless Communication Principles (2/e)”, Pearson,2002.
2. E. Biglieri, R.Calderbank, A. Constantinides, A. Goldsmith, A.Paulraj, H.Vincent poor,
“MIMO Wireless Communications”, Cambridge University Press,2007.
3. Robert Gallager, Chapter 9: “Wireless communication”, course materials for 6.450
Principles of Digital communication I,Fall 2006.MIT Open coursewarehttp://ocw.mit.edu/.
4. Recent literature in the related topics
53 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015
Course outcomes
Students are able to
CO1: summarize the importance of Coherence time, Coherence frequency, Doppler spread and
Delay spread in time-varying wireless channel model
CO2: derive the expression for BER for various wireless channel model.
CO3: derive the expression for the computation of spectral density of various bandpass
transmission and methodology to estimate from the received signal.
CO4: summarize the mathematical models related to MIMO and OFDM technology
CO5: summarize the signal processing aspects in various 5G Technology
54 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015