Course Code : ICPE50
Course Title : Hydraulics and Pneumatics
Type of Course : PE
Prerequisites : ICPC14
Contact Hours : 42 (3 credits)
Course Assessment Methods : Continuous Assessment, End Assessment
Course Learning Objectives (CLO)
CLO1 To provide an understanding of the working of hydraulic and pneumatic systems.
CLO2 To provide an understanding of energy transfer in hydraulic actuators and motors
CLO3 To provide knowledge about controlling components of hydraulic and pneumatic
systems.
CLO4 To provide knowledge of design of hydraulic and pneumatic systems and analyze
them.
Course Content
Introduction to Hydraulic Power: Pascal’s law and problems on Pascal’s Law, continuity
equations, Introduction to conversion of units, Structure of Hydraulic Control System. The
Source of Hydraulic Power: Pumps Pumping theory, pump classification, gear pumps, vane
pumps, piston pumps, pump performance, pump selection. Variable displacement pumps.
Hydraulic Actuators: Linear Hydraulic Actuators [cylinders], Mechanics of Hydraulic Cylinder
loading.
Hydraulic Motors: Hydraulic Rotary Actuators, Gear motors, vane motors, piston motors,
Hydraulic motor theoretical torque, power and flow rate, hydraulic motor performance. Control
Components in Hydraulic Systems: Directional Control Valves – Symbolic representation,
Constructional features, pressure control valves – direct and pilot operated types, flow control
valves.
Hydraulic Circuit Design and Analysis: Control of single and double – acting hydraulic
cylinder, regenerative circuit, pump unloading circuit, counter balance valve application,
hydraulic cylinder sequencing circuits. Cylinder synchronizing circuits, speed control of
hydraulic cylinder, speed control of hydraulic motors, Accumulators. Maintenance of
Hydraulic Systems: Hydraulic oils; desirable properties, general type of fluids, sealing
devices, reservoir system, filters and strainers, problem caused by gases in hydraulic fluids,
wear of moving parts due to solid particle contamination, temperature control, trouble
shooting.
Introduction to Pneumatic Control: Choice of working medium, characteristics of compressed
air. Structure of pneumatic control system. Compressed air: Production of compressed air –
compressors, preparation of compressed air- Driers, filters, regulators, lubricators,
distribution of compressed air. Pneumatic Actuators: Linear cylinders – types, conventional
type of cylinder working, end position cushioning, seals, mounting arrangements
applications.
Directional Control Valves: Symbolic representation as per ISO 1219 and ISO 5599. Design
and constructional aspects, poppet valves, slide valves spool valve, suspended seat type
slide valve. Simple Pneumatic Control: Direct and indirect actuation pneumatic cylinders, use
of memory valve. Flow control valves and speed control of cylinders supply air throttling and
exhaust air throttling, use of quick exhaust valve. Signal Processing Elements: Use of
Logic gates – OR and AND gates pneumatic applications, practical examples involving
the use of logic gates, Pressure dependent controls types construction– practical
applications, time dependent controls – principle, construction, practical applications.
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 169 | P age
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli
References
1. Anthony Esposito, Fluid Power with applications, Pearson education, Inc., 5th Edition,
2008.
2. Andrew Parr, Pneumatics and Hydraulics, Jaico Publishing Co. 2005.
3. Dr. Niranjan Murthy and Dr.R.K. Hegde, Hydraulics and Pneumatics, Sapna
Publications, 2013.
4. Majumdar S.R., Oil Hydraulics Systems - Principles and Maintenance, Tata McGraw-
Hill, 2017.
5. Majumdar, S.R., Pneumatic Systems – Principles and Maintenance, Tata McGraw Hill,
2017.
6. Srinivasan. R, Hydraulic and Pneumatic Control, Tata McGraw - Hill Education, 2nd
Edition, 2019.
7. Shanmugasundaram.K, Hydraulic and Pneumatic controls, ChandandCo,2006.
Course Outcomes (CO)
On completion of this course, the students will be able to,
CO1 Acquire knowledge about working of hydraulic and pneumatic systems.
CO2 Identify the controlling components of hydraulic and pneumatic systems.
CO3 Analyse and compile the design of hydraulic and pneumatic systems
CO4 Demonstrate the need of pressure and time dependent controls.
Course Outcome and Programme Outcome Mapping
0 1 2 1 2 3
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 1 1 O O O
O O O O O O O O O O O O S S S
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
CO1 3 3 3 3 3 - - - 2 2 2 3 3 3 -
CO2 3 3 3 3 3 - - - 2 2 2 3 3 3 -
CO3 3 3 3 3 3 - - - 2 2 2 3 3 3 -
CO4 3 3 3 3 3 - - - 2 2 2 3 3 3 -
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 170 | P age
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli