Course Code : ECPC15
Course Title : DIGITAL SIGNAL PROCESSING
Number of Credits 4
Prerequisites : ECPC10
(Course code)
Course Type : PC
Course Learning Objective
(i) To study about discrete-time Fourier transform (DTFT), the concepts of frequency response
characteristics of a discrete-time systems, DFT and its fast computation.
(ii) To make the students able to design digital filters (FIR and IIR) and implement in various
forms.
(iii) To study and understand the concept of multirate DSP systems and its applications
Course Content
Review of LSI system, DTFT, Frequency response of discrete time systems, all pass inverse, linear
phase and minimum phase systems.
DFT, Relationship of DFT to other transforms, FFT, DIT and DIF, FFT algorithm, Linear filtering
using DFT and FFT.
Characteristics of FIR Digital Filters, types and frequency response - Design of FIR digital filters using
window techniques and frequency sampling technique - basic structures and lattice structure for FIR
systems.
Analog filter approximations – Butter worth and Chebyshev, Design of IIR Digital filters from analog
filters, Analog and Digital frequency transformations - Basic structures of IIR systems, Transposed
forms.
Sampling rate conversion by an integer and rational factor, Poly phase FIR structures for sampling
rate conversion.
Text Books
1. J.G.Proakis, D.G. Manolakis, “Digital Signal Processing”, (4/e) Pearson, 2007.
2. A.V.Oppenheim & R.W.Schafer, “Discrete Time Signal processing", (2/e), Pearson
Education, 2003.
Reference Books
1. S.K.Mitra, “Digital Signal Processing (3/e)”, Tata McGraw Hill, 2006.
2. P.S.R.Diniz, E.A.B.da Silva and S.L.Netto, “Digital Signal Processing”, Cambridge, 2002.
3. E.C.Ifeachor & B.W.Jervis, “Digital Signal Processing”, (2/e), Pearson Education, 2002.
4. J.R.Jhonson, “Introduction to Digital Signal Processing”, Prentice-Hall, 1989.
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able to
CO1: analyze discrete-time systems in both time & transform domain and also through pole-zero
placement.
CO2: analyze discrete-time signals and systems using DFT and FFT.
CO3: design and implement digital finite impulse response (FIR) filters.
CO4: design and implement digital infinite impulse response (IIR) filters.
CO5: understand and develop multirate digital signal processing systems.
22 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015