Course Code : ECOE13
Course Title : DIGITAL SPEECH PROCESSING
Number of Credits 3
Prerequisites : ECPC15
(Course code)
Course Type : OE
Course learning Objective
 The purpose of this course is to explain how DSP techniques could be used for solving
problems in speech communication.
Course content
Speech production model-1D sound waves-functional block of the Vocal tract model –Linear
predictive co- efficients (LPC) -Auto-correlation method-Levinson-Durbin algorithm-Auto-co-
variance method-Lattice structure-Computation of Lattice co-efficient from LPC-Phonetic
Representation of speech-Perception of Loudness - Critical bands – Pitch perception – Auditory
masking.
Feature extraction of the speech signal: Endpoint detection-Dynamic time warping- Pitch frequency
estimation: Autocorrelation approach- Homomorphic approach-Formant frequency estimation using
vocal tract model and Homomorphic approach-Linear predictive co-efficient -Poles of the vocal tract-
Reflection co-efficient-Log Area ratio.
Cepstrum- Line spectral frequencies- Functional blocks of the ear- Mel frequency cepstral co-
efficient- Spectrogram-Time resolution versus frequency resolution-Discrete wavelet transformation.
Pattern recognition for speech detection: Back-propagation Neural Network-Support Vector Machine-
Hidden Markov Model (HMM)-Gaussian Mixture Model(GMM) -Unsupervised Learning system: K-
Means and Fuzzy K-means clustering - Kohonen self-organizing map-Dimensionality reduction
techniques: Principle component analysis (PCA), Linear discriminate analysis (LDA), Kernel-LDA
(KLDA), Independent component analysis(ICA).
Non-uniform quantization for Gaussian distributed data- Adaptive quantization-Differential pulse
code modulation- Code Exited Linear prediction (CELP)-Quality assessment of the compressed
speech signal Text to Speech (TTS) analysis –Evolution of speech synthesis systems-Unit selection
methods - TTS Applications.
Text Books
1. L.R.Rabiner and R.W.Schafer, ”Introduction to Digital speech processing”, now publishers
USA,2007
2. E.S.Gopi, ”Digital speech processing using matlab”, Springer, 2014.
Reference Books
1. L.R.Rabiner and R.W.Schafer, ”Digital processing of speech signals”, PrenticeHall,1978
2. T.F.Quatieri,”Discrete-time Speech Signal Processing”, Prentice-Hall, PTR,2001
3. L.Hanzaetal, “Voice Compression and Communications”, Wiley/ IEEE, 2001.
4. Recent literature in Digital speech processing.
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able
CO1: illustrate how the speech production is modeled
CO2: summarize the various techniques involved in collecting the features from the speech
signal in both time and frequency domain
CO3: summarize the functional blocks of the ear
CO4: compare the various pattern recognition techniques involved in speech and speaker
detection
CO5: summarize the various speech compression techniques
81 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015