Course Code : ECPC14
Course Title : DIGITAL CIRCUITS AND SYSTEMS
Number of Credits 3
Prerequisites : NONE
(Course code)
Course Type : PC
Course Learning Objective
 To introduce the theoretical and circuit aspects of digital electronics, which is the back bone
for the basics of the hardware aspect of digital systems
Course Content
Review of number systems-representation-conversions, error detection and error correction. Review
of Boolean algebra- theorems, sum of product and product of sum simplification, canonical forms-
min term and max term, Simplification of Boolean expressions-Karnaugh map, completely and
incompletely specified functions, Implementation of Boolean expressions using universal gates.
Combinational logic circuits- adders, subtractors, BCD adder, ripple carry look ahead adders, parity
generator, decoders, encoders, multiplexers, de-multiplexers, Realization of Boolean expressions-
using decoders-using multiplexers. Memories – ROM- organization, expansion. PROMs. Types of
RAMs – Basic structure, organization, Static and dynamic RAMs, PLDs, PLAs.
Sequential circuits – latches, flip flops, edge triggering, asynchronous inputs. Shift registers, Universal
shift register, applications. Binary counters – Synchronous and asynchronous up/down counters, mod-
N counter, Counters for random sequence.
Synchronous circuit analysis and design: structure and operation, analysis-transition equations, state
tables and state diagrams, Modelling- Moore machine and Mealy machine- serial binary adder,
sequence recogniser, state table reduction, state assignment. Hazard; Overview and comparison of
logic families.
Introduction to Verilog HDL, Structural, Dataflow and behavioural modelling of combinational and
sequential logic circuits.
Text Books
1. Wakerly J F, “Digital Design: Principles and Practices, Prentice-Hall”, 2nd Ed., 2002.
2. D. D. Givone, “Digital Principles and Design”, Tata Mc-Graw Hill, New Delhi, 2003.
Reference Books
1. S.Brown and Z.Vranesic, “Fundamentals of Digital Logic with Verilog Design”, Tata Mc-
Graw Hill, 2008.
2. D.P. Leach, A. P. Malvino, Goutam Guha, “Digital Principles and Applications”, Tata Mc-
Graw Hill, New Delhi, 2011.
3. M. M. Mano, “Digital Design”, 3rd ed., Pearson Education, Delhi, 2003.
4. R.J.Tocci and N.S.Widner, “Digital Systems - Principles& Applications”, PHI, 10th Ed.,
2007.
5. Roth C.H., “Fundamentals of Logic Design”, Jaico Publishers. V Ed., 2009.
6. T. L. Floyd and Jain,”Digital Fundamentals”, 8th ed., Pearson Education, 2003.
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able to
CO1: Apply the knowledge of Boolean algebra and simplification of Boolean expressions to
deduce optimal digital circuits.
CO2: Study and examine the SSI, MSI and Programmable combinational circuits.
CO3: Study and investigate the sequential networks suing counters and shift registers; summarize
the performance of logic families with respect to their speed, power consumption, number of ICs
and cost.
CO4: Work out SSI and MSI digital networks given a state diagram based on Mealy and Moore
configurations. Summarize the performance of logic families with respect to their speed, power
c onsumption, number of ICs and cost.
CO5: Code combinational and sequential circuits using Virology HDL.
21 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015