Course Code : ECPE49
Course Title : Foundations of Artificial Intelligence
Number of Credits : 3
Prerequisites : NONE
(Course code)
Course Type : Elective
COURSE LEARNING OBJECTIVE
 Approaches to produce "intelligent" systems, Knowledge representation (both symbolic and
neural network), search and machine learning.
 To learn the principles and fundamentals of designing AI programs.
Introduction to AI-Problem Solving as State Space Search, Uniformed Search, Heuristic Search,
Informed Search, Constraint Satisfaction Problems, Searching AND/OR Graphs.
Knowledge representation and Reasoning-Introduction to Knowledge Representation,
Propositional Logic, First Order Logic –I, First Order Logic –II, Inference in First Order Logic-I,
Inference in First Order Logic – II, Answer Extraction, Procedural Control of Reasoning, Reasoning
under Uncertainty, Bayesian Network, Decision Network.
Planning and decision Making-Introduction to Planning, Plan Space Planning, Planning Graph and
Graph Plan, Practical Planning and Acting, Sequential Decision Problems, Making Complex
Decisions.
Machine Learning-Introduction to Machine Learning, Learning Decision Trees, Linear Regression,
Support Vector Machines, Unsupervised Learning, Reinforcement Learning,
Introduction to deep learning, neural network learning
Text Books
1. Patrick Henry Winston, Artificial Intelligence, Third Edition, Addison-Wesley Publishing Company,
2004.
2. Stuart Russell and Peter Norvig, Artificial Intelligence: A Modern Approach, 3rd Edition, PHI
2009.
References
1. Nils J Nilsson, Principles of Artificial Intelligence, Illustrated Reprint Edition, Springer Heidelberg,
2014.
2. Nils J. Nilsson, Quest for Artificial Intelligence, First Edition, Cambridge University Press, 2010.
COURSE OUTCOMES
Students are able
CO1: To learn the concepts of artificial intelligence
CO2: To study problem solving techniques
CO3: To understand the representation of knowledge and reasoning mechanism
CO4: To learn to panning and decision making
CO5: To study network models used for learning
72 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015