Course Code : ECMI21
Course Title : ANTENNAS AND PROPAGATION
Number of Credits 3
Prerequisites : ECMI12
(Course code)
Course Type : MI
Course Learning Objective
 To impart knowledge on basics of antenna theory and to analyze and design a start of art
antenna for wireless communications.
Course Content
Radiation fundamentals. Potential theory. Helmholtz integrals. Radiation from a current element.
Basic antenna parameters. Radiation field of an arbitrary current distribution. Small loop antennas.
Receiving antenna. Reciprocity relations. Receiving cross section, and its relation to gain. Reception
of completely polarized waves. Linear antennas. Current distribution. Radiation field of a thin dipole.
Folded dipole. Feeding methods. Baluns.
Antenna arrays. Array factorization. Array parameters. Broad side and end fire arrays. Yagi-Uda
arrays Log-periodic arrays.
Aperture antennas. Fields as sources of radiation. Horn antennas. Babinet’s principle. Parabolic
reflector antenna. Microstrip antennas.
Wave Propagation: Propagation in free space. Propagation around the earth, surface wave propagation,
structure of the ionosphere, propagation of plane waves in ionized medium, Determination of critical
frequency, MUF. Fading, tropospheric propagation, Super refraction.
Text Books
1. R.E.Collin, “Antennas and Radio Wave Propagation”, McGraw – Hill, 1985.
2. W.L.Stutzman & G.A.Thiele, “Antenna Theory and Design”, Wiley.
Reference Books
1. K.F.Lee, “Principles of Antenna Theory”, Wiley, 1984.
2. F.E. Terman, “Electronic Radio Engineering (4/e)”, McGraw Hill.
3. J.R. James, P. S. Hall, and C. Wood, “Microstrip Antenna Theory and Design”, IEE, 1981.
4. C.A.Balanis, “Modern Antenna Handbook”, Wiley India Pvt. Limited, 2008.
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able
CO1: select the appropriate portion of electromagnetic theory and its application to antennas.
CO2: distinguish the receiving antennas from transmitting antennas, analyze and justify their
characteristics.
CO3: assess the need for antenna arrays and mathematically analyze the types of antenna arrays.
CO4: distinguish primary from secondary antennas and analyze their characteristics by applying
optics and acoustics principles.
CO5: outline the factors involved in the propagation of radio waves using practical antennas.
113 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015