CE209 Concrete Technology 3 0 0 3
CE209 CONCRETE TECHNOLOGY
Course objectives:
To understand the properties of ingredients of concrete
To study the behavior of concrete at its fresh and hardened state
To study about the concrete design mix
To know about the procedures in concreting
To understand special concrete and their use
Course Content
Introduction - Concrete materials - Cement: Physical tests on cement - Concrete materials - Tests on
aggregates - Quality of Water for mixing and curing - use of sea water for mixing concrete
8
Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
Mix Design - factors influencing mix proportion - Mix design by ACI method and I.S. code method -
Design of high strength concrete.
Admixtures - accelerating admixtures - Retarding admixtures - water reducing admixtures - Air
entraining admixtures - coloring agent - Plasticizers. Batching - Mixing -Transportation - Placing of
concrete - curing of Concrete
Strength of Concrete - Shrinkage and temperature effects - creep of concrete - permeability of concrete
- durability of concrete - Corrosion - Causes and effects - remedial measures- Thermal properties of
concrete - Micro cracking of concrete.
Special Concrete - light weight concrete - Fibre reinforced concrete - Polymer-polymer modified
concrete - Ferrocement - Mass concrete - Ready mix concrete- Self compacting concrete- Quality
control - Sampling and testing-Acceptance criteria
References
1. Shetty, M.S., Concrete Technology, Theory & Practice, S.Chand and Co, 2004.
2. Gambhir, M.L., Concrete Technology, Tata McGraw Hill, 2004.
3. Nevile, Properties of Concrete, Longman Publishers, 2004.
4. Santakumar A.R., Concrete Technology, Oxford University Press, New Delhi, 2007.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
test all the concrete materials as per IS code
design the concrete mix using ACI and IS code methods
determine the properties of fresh and hardened of concrete
design special concretes and their specific applications
ensure quality control while testing/ sampling and acceptance criteria