Course Code : ECPE29
Course Title : BROADBAND ACCESS TECHNOLOGIES
Number of Credits 3
Prerequisites : ECPC18 & ECPC19
(Course code)
Course Type : PE
Course learning Objective
 To impart fundamentals and latest technologies related to the design of broadband last mile-
Access technologies for multimedia communication
Course content
Wired access technologies using Phone line modem, ISDN modem. Comparison-Cable, DSL, fiber
and wireless access technologies.
Last mile copper access, Flavors of Digital subscriber lines, DSL deployment, Common local loop
impairments, discrete multi-tone modulation, VDSL deployment and frequency plans. Standards for
XDSL and comparison.
Last mile HFC access, Cable modems. Modulation schemes, DOCSIS. Standards- comparison,
physical and MAC layer protocols for HFC networks, ATM and IP-centric modem. Switched digital
video.
Fiber access technologies and architectures. ATM passive optical networks, Upstream and
downstream transport, Frame format, Ethernet passive optical network, Gigabit passive optical
networks.
Survey on emerging broadband wireless access technologies. LMDS,MMDS,WIMAX and WIFI,
Satellite technologies serving as last mile solutions, Wireless LAN, Wireless personal area
networking, 3G and 4G wireless systems.
Text Books
1. N.Jayant, “Broadband last mile”-Taylor and Francisgroup,2005
2. N.Ransom & A.A. Azzam, “Broadband Access Technologies”, McGraw Hill, 1999.
Reference Books
1. M.P. Clarke, “Wireless Access Network”, Wiley, 2000.
2. T.Starr, M.Sorbara, J.M.Cioffi and P.J.Silverman,”DSLadvances”,PrenticeHall,2002
3. S. Mervana & C.Le, “Design and Implementation of DSL-based Access Solutions”, Cisco
Press, 2001.
4. W. Vermillion, “End-to-End DSL Architecture”, Cisco Press, 2003.
5. DOCSIS 2.0 “Radio frequency interface specification”www.cablemodem.com
6. ITU-T Rec., G.983.1 “Broadband Optical Access systems based on Passive
OpticalNetworks”,1998
7. Recent literature in Broadband Access Technologies.
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able
CO1: recall and identify the basics of broadband technology systems and differentiate the
differences between the various wired and wireless technology system
CO2: illustrate the aspects of last mile data transport on copper wire networks and flavors of
DSL
CO3: summarize the versions of cable network standard and MAC protocols for HFC networks
CO4: distinguish the cost effective broadband services for residential users and ATM based and
Ethernet based passive optical networks
CO5: outline the types of broadband wireless access technologies and their characteristics.
50 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015