Course Code : ECPC17
Course Title : ELECTRONIC CIRCUITS
Number of Credits 3
Prerequisites : ECPC13
(Course code)
Course Type : PC
Course Learning Objective
 To make the students understand the fundamentals of electronic circuits.
Course Content
Load line, operating point, biasing methods for BJT and MOSFET. Low frequency and high models
of BJT and MOSFET, Small signal Analysis of CE, CS, CD and Cascade amplifier
MOSFET amplifiers: Current mirrors: Basic current mirror, Cascade current mirror, Single-ended
amplifiers: CS amplifier – with resistive load, diode connected load, current source load, triode load,
source degeneration. CG and CD amplifiers, Cascade amplifier,
Frequency response of amplifiers, Differential Amplifiers, CMRR, Differential amplifiers with active
load, two stage amplifiers
Feedback concept, Properties, Feedback amplifiers, Stability analysis, Condition for oscillation,
Sinusoidal oscillators.
Power amplifiers- class A, class B, class AB, Biasing circuits, class C and class D
Text Books
1. A.S.Sedra & K.C.Smith, “Microelectronic Circuits (5/e)”, Oxford, 2004.
2. D.L.Schilling & C.Belove, ”Electronic Circuits: Discrete and Integrated”, (3/e), McGraw
Hill, 1989.
Reference Books
1. Behzad Razavi, “Design of Analog CMOS Integrated Circuits”, (2/e), McGraw Hill, 2017.
2. J.Millman & Arvin Grabel, “Microelectronics”, McGraw Hill, 2007.
3. K.V.Ramanan, “Functional Electronics”, Tata McGraw Hill, 1984.
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able
CO1: illustrate about rectifiers, transistor and FET amplifiers and its biasing. Also compare the
performances of its low frequency models.
CO 2: discuss about the frequency response of MOSFET and BJT amplifiers.
CO 3: illustrate about MOS and BJT differential amplifiers and its characteristics.
CO4: discuss about the feedback concepts and construct feedback amplifiers and oscillators. Also
summarizes its performance parameters.
CO 5: explain about power amplifiers and its types and also analyze its characteristics.
24 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015