Course Code : ECPC12
Course Title : ELECTRODYNAMICS AND ELECTROMAGNETIC WAVES
Number of Credits 4
Prerequisites : NONE
(Course code)
Course Type : PC
Course Learning Objective
 To expose the students to the rudiments of Electromagnetic theory and wave propagation
essential for subsequent courses on microwave engineering, antennas and wireless
communication
Course Content
Electrostatics. Coulomb’s law. Gauss’s law and applications. Electric potential. Poisson’s and Laplace
equations. Method of images. Multipole Expansion.
Electrostatic fields in matter. Dielectrics and electric polarization. Capacitors with dielectric
substrates. Linear dielectrics. Force and energy in dielectric systems.
Magneto-statics. Magnetic fields of steady currents. Biot-Savart’s and Ampere’s laws. Magnetic
vector potential. Magnetic properties of matter.
Electrodynamics. Flux rule for motional emf. Faraday’s law. Self and mutual inductances. Maxwell’s
Equations. Electromagnetic Boundary conditions. Poynting theorem.
Electromagnetic wave propagation. Uniform plane waves. Wave polarization. Waves in matter.
Reflection and transmission at boundaries. Propagation in an ionized medium.
Text Books
1. D.J.Griffiths, “Introduction to Electrodynamics (3/e)”, PHI, 2001
2. E.C. Jordan & G. Balmain, “Electromagnetic Waves and Radiating Systems”, PHI, 1995.
Reference Books
1. W.H.Hayt, “Engineering Electromagnetics, (7/e)”, McGraw Hill, 2006.
2. D.K.Cheng, “Field and Wave Electromagnetics, (2/e)”, Addison Wesley, 1999.
3. M.N.O.Sadiku, ”Principles of Electromagnetics, (4/e)”, Oxford University Press, 2011.
4. N.NarayanaRao, “Elements of Engineering Electromagnetics, (6/e)”, Pearson, 2006.
5. R.E.Collin, “Foundations for Microwave Engineering (2/e)”, McGraw –Hill, 2002.
6. R.E.Collin, “Antennas and Radio wave Propagation”, McGraw-Hill, 1985.
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able
CO1: recognize and classify the basic Electrostatic theorems and laws and to derive them.
CO2: discuss the behaviour of Electric fields in matter and Polarization concepts.
CO3: classify the basic Magneto static theorems and laws and infer the magnetic properties of
matter.
CO4: summarize the concepts of electrodynamics &to derive and discuss the Maxwell’s
equations.
CO5: students are expected to be familiar with Electromagnetic wave propagation and wave
polarization.
19 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015