Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
SEMESTER VI
Code Course of Study L T P C
CE302 Structural Analysis - II 2 1 0 3
CE304 Transportation Engineering - I 2 1 0 3
CE306 Concrete Structures-II 3 0 2 4
CE308 Steel Structures - II 2 0 2 3
CE310 Water Resources Engineering 3 0 0 3
Elective - 1 3 0 0 3
CE312 Computer Aided Design - I 0 0 3 2
CE314 Estimation, Costing and Valuation 0 0 3 2
Total 15 2 10 23
SEMESTER VII
Code Course of Study L T P C
CE401 Matrix Methods of Structural Analysis 2 1 0 3
CE403 Transportation Engineering - II 3 0 0 3
CE405 Irrigation and Hydraulic Structures 2 0 2 3
HM401 Industrial Economics 3 0 0 3
Elective – 2 3 0 0 3
Elective – 3 3 0 0 3
CE407 Computer Aided Design - II 0 0 3 2
CE447 Comprehensive Viva - Voce 0 0 6 3
Total 16 1 11 23
SEMESTER VIII
Code Course of Study L T P C
MB491 Management Concepts and Practices 3 0 0 3
CE402 Prestressed Concrete Structures 3 0 0 3
Elective – 4 3 0 0 3
Elective – 5 3 0 0 3
CE498 Project Work 0 0 12 6
Total 12 0 12 18
2
Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
SEMESTER VI
CE302 STRUCTURAL ANALYSIS – II
Course objectives :
To understand the influence line concepts for indeterminate structures
To understand the methods of analysis of intermediate trusses for external loads, lack of fit and
thermal effect
To study behaviour of arches and their methods of analysis
To know the concept and analysis of cable stayed bridge
To study the multi storey frames subjected to gravity loads and lateral loads
Course Content
Influence lines - Maxwell Betti's theorem - Muller Breslau's principle and its application. Influence lines
for continuous beams and single bay, single storey portals with prismatic members.
Analysis of plane truss with one or two redundants - trusses with lack of fit - Thermal stresses -
Settlement of supports - Trussed beams.
Theory of arches - Analysis of three hinged, two hinged and fixed arches - influence lines, rib
shortening, settlement and temperature effects.
Analysis of cables - Suspension bridges with three and two hinged stiffening girders - influence lines.
Analysis of multistorey frames for gravity and lateral loads by approximate methods - Substitute frame -
Portal and Cantilever methods.
References
1. Punmia, B.C, Theory of Structures, Laxmi Publications, 2000.
2. Timoshenko, S.P.,Young, D.H., Theory of Structures, Tata McGraw Hill, 1983.
3. Wang. C.K., Intermediate Structural Analysis, International Text Book Co, 1983.
4. Hibbeler. R.C., Structural Analysis, Pearson Education (Singapore) Ptc. Ltd., Indian Branch, 2002.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
demonstrate the concepts of qualitative influence line diagram for continuous beams and
frames
apply the methods of indeterminate truss analysis
demonstrate the behavior of arches and their methods of analysis
analyze cable suspension bridges
analyze multistory frames subjected to gravity loads and lateral loads
CE304 TRANSPORTATION ENGINEERING - I
Course objectives:
To understand the importance of transportation and characteristics of road transport
To know about the history of highway development, surveys and classification of roads
25
Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
To study about the geometric design of highways
To study about traffic characteristics and design of intersections
To know about the pavement materials and design
Course Content
Introduction: Importance of transportation, different modes of transportation, characteristics of road
transport, scope of highway and traffic engineering
Highway development and planning: Importance, classification of roads, road patterns, planning
surveys; highway alignment and surveys
Highway Geometric Design: Cross section elements, sight distance, design of horizontal and vertical
alignment
Traffic Engineering: Traffic characteristics - Traffic studies-speed, volume, speed and delay, origin-
destination, parking and accident studies; capacity of urban roads and highways; traffic operations-
regulation and control; design of intersections- at grade and grade separated
Pavement Materials and Design: Specifications and tests on pavement materials, pavement design
factors, design of flexible and rigid pavements as per IRC.
References
1. Khanna, S.K and Justo, C.E.G., Highway Engineering, Nem Chand and Bros.
2. Kadiyali, L.R, Traffic Engineering and Transport Planning, Khanna Publishers, New Delhi
3. Kadiyali, Principles of Highway Engineering, Khanna Publishers.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
carry out surveys involved in planning and highway alignment
design cross section elements, sight distance, horizontal and vertical alignment
implement traffic studies, traffic regulations and control, and intersection design
determine the characteristics of pavement materials
design flexible and rigid pavements as per IRC
CE306 CONCRETE STRUCTURES – II
Course objectives:
To understand the design concept of various structures and detailing of reinforcements
To understand the design of underground and elevated liquid retaining structures
To study the design of material storage structures
To know the effect of temperature on concrete structures
To study the design of bridges subjected to IRC loading
Course Content
Earth Retaining structures - Retaining walls- types - cantilever and counterfort - design - drainage and
other construction details. Liquid Retaining structure - Water tanks - types - square, rectangular, circular
- Design of underground and elevated tanks - design of staging - spherical & conical roof for circular
26
Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
tanks. Material storage structures - Determination of lateral pressure on side walls of bunker -
Rankine's theory - design of bunker - design of circular silo using Jansen's theory. Environmental
Structures - Chimneys - Principles and Design - Design of long columns. Transportation structures -
Bridges - Slab bridge - Design of single span slab bridge - Tee beam bridge - Design of Tee beam
bridge with stiffness - Tee beam bridge with cross girders
Note: Assignments include the design and drawings of various RCC structures.
References
1. Vazirani, V.N., and Ratwani, Concrete Structures, Vol. IV, Khanna Publishers, New Delhi, 1995.
2. Dayaratnam, P., Design of Reinforced Concrete Structures, Oxford & IBH Publishers & Co., New
Delhi, 2005.
3. Victor, D.J., Essentials of Bridge Engineering, Oxford & IBH Publishers Co., Newdelhi, 1991.
4. IS456-2006 Code of practice for Plain and reinforced concrete code of practice.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
apply the concepts of liquid retaining structures
design material storage structures using various theories
apply the concepts of environmental and transportation structures
demonstrate the detailing of reinforcement
draw the various RCC structures
CE308 STEEL STRUCTURES-II
Course objectives:
To introduce the concept of plastic analysis
To study the behaviour and design of compression member subjected to eccentric force and
design of base plate
To study the design of Gantry girder, welded plate girder, stiffeners and connections
To calculate the wind forces on steel stacks as per IS 875 and design the self supporting steel
stacks including base plate and anchor bolts
To study the behaviour and design of light gauge steel sections
Course Content
Eccentrically loaded column - simple and compound section - lacings and battens - column bases –
slab base – gusseted base – moment resistant base plate
Welded plate girders – analysis and design using IS800-2007 - curtailment of flange plates –stiffeners –
analysis and design of gantry girder
Introduction to IS875 part (3) – assessment of wind load – analysis and design of steel stacks -
functional and structural requirements - self supporting and guyed stacks - base plate and anchor bolt
Light gauge steel sections-types of cross section - Local and post buckling - Effective width concept-
Compression and Flexural members.
27