Course Code : ICPE63
Course Title : Artificial Intelligence in Instrumentation and
Measurement
Type of Course : PE/OE
Prerequisites : --
Contact Hours : 3 hours (42 hrs max)
Course Assessment Methods : Continuous Assessment, End Assessment
Course Learning Objectives (CLO)
CLO1 To introduce the basic concepts of neural networks
CLO2 To impart knowledge on the development of classical deep neural networks such
as CNN and RNN
CLO3 To make the students aware of graph neural networks and generative AI
CLO4 To demonstrate various applications of AI in instrumentation and measurement
Course Content
History of Deep Learning, Deep Learning Success Stories, McCulloch Pitts Neuron,
Thresholding Logic, Perceptrons, Perceptron Learning Algorithm and Convergence,
Multilayer Perceptrons (MLPs), Representation Power of MLPs
Sigmoid Neurons, Gradient Descent, Feedforward Neural Networks, Representation Power
of Feedforward Neural Networks
Feedforward Neural Networks, Backpropagation, Gradient Descent (GD), Momentum Based
GD, Nesterov Accelerated GD, Stochastic GD, AdaGrad, RMSProp, Adam
Bias Variance Tradeoff, L2 regularization, Early stopping, Dataset augmentation, Parameter
sharing and tying, Injecting noise at input, Ensemble methods, Better activation functions,
Better weight initialization methods, Batch Normalization
Convolutional Neural Networks, Types of CNN, LeNet, AlexNet, ZF-Net, VGGNet,
GoogLeNet, ResNet
Auto encoders, Types of auto encoders, Recurrent neural networks, LSTM and Types,
Multimodal data and models, Graph neural networks and Generative adversarial networks,
Transformers: Multi-headed Self Attention, Cross Attention
Applications: Autonomous driving, fault detection, vision-based measurement, and health
along with case studies
References
1. Ian Goodfellow and Yoshua Bengio and Aaron Courville. Deep Learning. An MIT Press
book. 2016.
2. Charu C. Aggarwal. Neural Networks and Deep Learning: A Textbook. Springer. 2019.
3. Josh Patterson, Adam Gibson "Deep Learning: A Practitioner's Approach", O'Reilly
Media, 2017.
4. Eren, Halit. Artificial Intelligence in Wireless Sensors and Instruments: Networks and
Applications. N.p., Taylor & Francis Limited, 2024.
5. Neural Networks for Instrumentation, Measurement, and Related Industrial
Applications. Japan, IOS Press, 2003.
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 195 | P age
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli
Course Outcomes (CO)
On completion of this course, the students will be able to,
CO1 Understand the basic concepts of artificial neural networks
CO2 Gain the knowledge of classical deep learning algorithms and its variants
CO3 Understand the concepts of graph neural networks and generative AI along with its
importance
CO4 Design and develop deep learning architectures for real-world applications
Course Outcome and Programme Outcome Mapping
0 1 2 1 2 3
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 1 1 O O O
O O O O O O O O O O O O S S S
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
CO1 3 3 3 3 3 2 - - - - - 2 3 3
CO2 3 3 3 3 3 2 - - - - - 2 3 3
CO3 3 3 3 3 3 2 - - - - - 2 3 3
CO4 3 3 3 3 3 2 - - - - - 2 3 3
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 196 | P age
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli