Course Code : ECHO17
Course Title : ADVANCED RADIATION SYSTEMS
Number of Credits 3
Prerequisites : ECPC19
(Course code)
Course Type : HO
Course learning Objectives
 To prepare the students understand the operating principles of various RF radiating systems.
 To enable the students appreciate the diverse applications of radiating systems.
 To design the suitable antenna systems to serve a defined application.
Course content
Antenna Fundamentals
Antenna fundamental parameters, Radiation integrals, Radiation from surface and line current
distributions – dipole, monopole, loop antenna; Broadband antennas and matching techniques,
Balance to unbalance transformer, Introduction to numerical techniques.
Apertures Antennas
Field equivalence principle, Radiation from Rectangular and Circular apertures, Uniform aperture
distribution on an infinite ground plane; Slot antenna; Horn antenna; Reflector antenna, aperture
blockage, and design consideration.
Arrays
General structure of phased array, linear array theory, variation of gain as a function of pointing
direction, frequency scanned arrays, digital beam forming, and MEMS technology in phased arrays-
Retro directive and self-phased arrays.
Micro Strip Antenna
Radiation Mechanism from patch; Excitation techniques; Microstrip dipole; Rectangular patch,
Circular patch, and Ring antenna – radiation analysis from transmission line model, cavity model;
input impedance of rectangular and circular patch antenna; Application of microstrip array antenna.
Terahertz Planar Antennas
Electronics band gap materials - Photonic Band-gap Structures- Tera Hertz Patch antennas-Special
antenna structures.
Text Books
rd.
1. S. Haykins,” Communication Systems”, John Wiley, 3 Edition,1995.
2. RR Gulathi, “Monochrome and Colour Television”, New Age International Publishers,
nd
2 edition, 2005.
Reference Book
1. J. G. Proakis& M .Salehi,” Communication Systems Engineering”, Prentice Hall,
nd
2 edition, 2002.
th
3. Kennedy & Davis,” Electronic Communication systems”, Tata McGraw Hill, 4 edition,
1999.
4. Recent literature in Advanced Radiation Systems.
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able
CO1: understand the various antenna parameters and different impedance matching
techniques.
CO2: understand the working principle of apertures antennas.
CO3: analyze how the electronic beam formation is done using array of antennas.
CO4: compare the merits and demerits of various microwave patch antenna structures.
CO5: understand the photonic band gap structures and its application in tera hertz antennas.
135 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015