Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
3. Loucks, D.P., Stedinger, J.R. and Haith, D.A., Water Resource Systems Planning and Analysis,
Prentice-Hall INC, 1981.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
apply the software skills in the design of infrastructure
apply computing techniques to transportation engineering
analyze water resource networks
apply computing skills to geotechnical engineering
run various software packages
SEMESTER VIII
MB491 MANAGEMENT CONCEPTS & PRACTICES
Course objectives:
To enrich the students with the concepts and applications of Management
To make the learners understand the basic functions of Financial Management
To facilitate the students with the fundamental concepts of Technology management
To enhance the understanding of Project Management techniques
To impart the importance of Human Resources in the organizational context
Course Content
Introduction to management- Evolution of Scientific and Modern Management Principles-Functions of
Management-Types of Business Organization – Managerial Roles – Levels of Management.
Decision Making. Nature Purpose and Steps involved in Planning. Objectives – Strategies and Planning
Premises. Nature and purpose of Organizing. Formal and informal Organization. Span of control –
Delegation of Authority.
Introduction to Human Resource Management. Creativity and Innovation. Motivation theories
(Hierarchy of Needs by Maslow, Herzberg’s Two-Factor theory) – Motivational Techniques – Monetary
& Non-monetary, Job Enrichment.
Types of Leadership – Leadership Theories. Communication – Process of Communication – Barriers
and Breakdown- Effective Communication.
System and process of Controlling – Requirements for effective control – The budget as control
Technique. Globalization and Liberalization – International Management and Global Theory of
Management, Corporate Social Responsibility.
References
1. Harold Kooritz & Heinz Weihrich “Essentials of Management”, Tata McGraw-Hill.
2. L.M. Prasad, Principles of Management , Sultan Chand & sons, New Delhi.
3. Sherlekar & sherlekar, Principles of Management, Himalaya Publishing House, New Delhi.
4. Stephen Robbins, Organizational Behavior, Pearson Education, New Delhi.
35