CE454 Advanced Foundation Engineering 3 0 0 3
CE454 ADVANCED FOUNDATION ENGINEERING
Course objectives:
To explain the analysis of sheet pile wall under different support conditions
To explain overall stability analysis of well foundation
To explain fundamentals of soil dynamics and its application to machine foundation analysis
including codel provisions
To explain problems related to expansive soils and solution to overcome
To explain the concept of slope stability analysis for various slope conditions including
graphical methods
Course Content
Sheet pile structures - cantilever sheet pile walls in granular and cohesive soils - Anchored bulk
heads - Free earth support and fixed earth support methods - Anchors.
Cofferdams - types - cellular cofferdam - uses - Design by TVA and Cumming's method.
Well foundations - Types of caissons - Analysis of well foundations - determination of scourdepth
- steining thickness - well sinking.
Foundations subjected to vibrations - elements of vibrations - Free, damped, free and forced vibrations
- Design criteria - Pauw's analogy - IS Code of practice for impact and reciprocating machines.
40
Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
Foundation drainage and water proofing - Dewatering well points system, sand drains.
Foundations in expansive soils - Mechanism - factors influencing swelling - Use of Geosynthetics.
Stability analysis of slopes - infinite slopes in sand and clays - finite slope - Swedish circle - stability
of earth dam slope during steady and sudden draw down - friction circle method - Taylor's stability
number. Sheet pile structures - Anchored bulk heads
References
1. Bowles, J.E., Foundation Analysis and Design, McGraw Hill., 1996.
2. Braja M. Das, Principles of Foundation Engineering, Thomos Asia Pvt. Ltd., Singapore, 2005.
3. Shamsher Prakash, Soil Dynamics, McGraw - Hill Book Company, 1985.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
analyze and design any kind of sheet pile wall system including coffer dam
analyze and design well foundation including complete stability analysis
estimate soil parameters under dynamic conditions including machine foundations
design a suitable foundation system for any kind of problematic soils
analyze the stability of any kind of slope by using both theoretical and graphical methods