Course Code : ICOE15
Course Title : Virtual Instrument Design
Type of Course : Open Elective (OE)
Prerequisites : --
Contact Hours : 42 (3 credits)
Course Assessment : Continuous Assessments, Assignments, Final
Methods Assessment
Course Learning Objectives (CLO)
CLO1 To introduce to the students about the interfacing techniques of various
transducers.
CLO2 To expose the students to different signal conditioning circuits.
CLO3 To impart knowledge on the hardware required to build Virtual Instrument.
CLO4 To impart knowledge to build GUI for Virtual Instrument.
Course Content
Transducer Interfacing: Interfacing techniques for the following transducers: Potentiometers
- Temperature sensors – Thermocouple, RTD, Thermistors – Load cells – High and low range
tension, Low and mid-range precision – Torque Sensors –Pressure sensors – Vibration
Sensors – Acoustic Sensors – Automotive Sensors – Displacement sensors – Biomedical
transducers.
Signal Conditioning: Filtering, Cold Junction Compensation, Amplification, Instrumentation
Amplifier Linearization–Circuit Protection-Ground loops, CMRR, Noise Reduction and
Isolation, Attenuation Multiplexing–Digital signal conditioning–IEEE1451standards
Transducer Electronic Data Sheet (TEDS)
Data Acquisition and Hardware Selection: Overview of DAQ architecture – Analog IO and
Digital IO - Finite and continuous buffered acquisition – Data acquisition with C language -
Industrial Communication buses – Wireless network standards - Micro-controller selection
parameters for a virtual instrument – CPU, code space (ROM), data space (RAM)
requirements.
Real-Time OS for Small Devices: Small device real-time concepts – Resources - Sequential
programming - Multitasking - RTOS – Kernels – Timing loops – Synchronization and
scheduling – Fixed point analysis – Building embedded real-time application for small devices.
Graphical User Interface for Virtual Instrument: Building an embedded Virtual Instrument GUI
– Text and Number display – GUI Windows management. – Simulation – Display drivers –
Creating and distributing applications – Examples of Virtual Instrument design using GUI in
any of the applications like consumer goods, robotics, machine vision, and process control
automation.
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 222 | P age
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli
References
1. Daniel H. Sheingold, Transducer Interfacing Handbook – A Guide to Analog Signal
Conditioning, Analog Devices Inc.1980.
2. Kevin James, PC Interfacing and Data Acquisition- Techniques for Measurement,
Instrumentation and Control, Newnes, 2011.
3. Timothy Wilmshurst, Designing Embedded Systems with PIC Microcontrollers-
Principles and Applications, Elsevier, 2010.
4. Jean Labrosse, Embedded System Building Blocks, 2nd Edition. RandD Books, 2020
5. Jean Labrosse, MicroC/OS-II – The Real-Time Kernel, 2nd Edition. CMP Books, 2002
Course Outcomes (CO)
On completion of this course, the students will be able to,
CO1 Interface the target transducer to the signal conditioning board.
CO2 Condition the acquired signal from the transducer to standard data formats.
CO3 Select the most appropriate hardware for the virtual instrument to be built.
CO4 Implement the real-time OS for the selected micro-controller and the GUI interface
for the virtual instrument.
Course Outcome and Programme Outcome Mapping
0 1 2 1 2 3
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 1 1 O O O
O O O O O O O O O O O O S S S
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
CO1 3 3 3 3 3 3 2 2 - - - 3 3 3 -
CO2 3 3 3 3 3 3 2 2 - - - 3 3 3 -
CO3 2 3 3 3 3 3 2 2 - - - 3 3 3 -
CO4 3 2 2 3 2 3 3 2 - - - 3 3 3 -
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 223 | P age
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli