CE311 Advanced Strength of Materials 3 0 0 3
CE311 ADVANCED STRENGTH OF MATERIALS
Course objectives:
To understand the mechanical properties of materials
To understand the different theories of failure for brittle and ductile materials
To know the features of unsymmetrical bending and different methods of analysis
To understand the concept of shear centre and to know different methods for its location
To know the fundamentals of vibration of structure
22
Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
Course Content
Mechanical Properties of Materials - Stress-Strain Diagrams- Elastic and Plastic Deformation - Brittle
and Ductile Failures of Materials - Mechanical Tests like Surface Hardness, Fatigue, Creep etc.
Principal stresses in a 3D field.- Computation -Mohr's Circle - Lame's Ellipsoid. Theories of failure -
Criteria for Failure - Different failure theories for ductile and brittle materials. Equivalent bending and
twisting moments.
Unsymmetrical bending- Properties of unsymmetrical sections- Circle of inertia - Dyadic circle -
Momental ellipse- Stresses and deflection due to unsymmetrical bending - Concept and relevance of Z
polygon.
Shear Centre - Concept and significance - Shear flow for thin walled open sections-Location of shear
centre for singly symmetric sections. Stresses in curved flexural members-Winkler Bach Formula -
Crane hooks - rings and links.
Fundamentals of vibration - free vibration of single degree of freedom systems - Undamped and
damped free vibration with different types of damping.- Resonance-Harmonic response of single
degree of freedom systems with and without damping.
References
1. Srinath, L. S., Advanced Mechanics of Solids , Tata McGraw Hill,1980.
2. Kazimi, S.M.A., Solid Mechanics, Tata McGraw Hill, 1976.
3. Punmia, B.C., Strength of Materials Part II, Standard Publishers and Distributors, 1991.
4. Shames I.H., Engineering Mechanics, Prentice Hall of India,1996
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
determine the important mechanical properties of materials
demonstrate the different theories of failure for brittle and ductile materials
apply the different methods of unsymmetrical bending analysis
demonstrate the significance and concept of shear centre
apply the principles of structural dynamics