Course Code : ECMI19
Course Title : DIGITAL SIGNAL PROCESSORS AND APPLICATIONS
Number of Credits 3
Prerequisites : ECMI15
(Course code)
Course Type : MI
Course Learning Objective
 To give an exposure to the various fixed point and floating point DSP architectures, to
understand the techniques to interface sensors and I/O circuits and to implement applications
using these processors.
Course Content
Fixed-point DSP architectures. Basic Signal processing system. Need for DSPs. Difference between
DSP and other processor architectures. TMS320C54X, ADSP21XX, DSP56XX architecture details.
Addressing modes. Control and repeat operations. Interrupts. Pipeline operation. Memory Map and
Buses.
Floating-point DSP architectures. TMS320C3X, DSP96XX architectures. Cache architecture.
Floating-point Data formats. On-chip peripherals. Memory Map and Buses.
On-chip peripherals. Hardware details and its programming. Clock generator with PLL. Serial port.
McBSP. Parallel port. DMA. EMIF. I2C. Real-time-clock (RTC). Watchdog timer.
Interfacing. Serial interface- Audio codec. Sensors - Humidity/temperature sensor, flow sensor,
accelerometer, pulse sensor and finger print scanner. A/D and D/A interfaces. Parallel interface-
Memory interface. RF transceiver interface – Wi-Fi and Zigbee modules.
DSP tools and applications. Implementation of Filters, DFT, QPSK Modem, Speech processing. Video
processing, Video Encoding /Decoding. Biometrics. Machine Vision. High performance computing
(HPC).
Text Books
1. B.Venkataramani & M.Bhaskar, “Digital Signal Processor, Architecture, Programming and
Applications”,(2/e), McGraw- Hill,2010
2. S.Srinivasan & Avtar Singh, “Digital Signal Processing, Implementations using DSP
Microprocessors with Examples from TMS320C54X”, Brooks/Cole, 2004.
Reference Books
1. S.M.Kuo & W.S.S.Gan,” Digital Signal Processors: Architectures, Implementations, and
Applications”, Printice Hall, 2004
2. C.Marven & G.Ewers, “A Simple approach to digital signal processing”, Wiley Inter science,
1996.
3. R.A.Haddad & T.W.Parson, “Digital Signal Processing: Theory, Applications and
Hardware”, Computer Science Press NY, 1991.
Course outcomes
At the end of the course student will be able
CO1: learn the architecture details of fixed point DSPs.
CO2: learn the architecture details of floating point DSPs
CO3: infer about the control instructions, interrupts, pipeline operations, memory and buses.
CO4: illustrate the features of on-chip peripheral devices and its interfacing with real time
application devices.
CO5: learn to implement the signal processing algorithms and applications in DSPs
111 | P age
Department of Electronics and Communication Engineering,
National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015