Course Code : ICPE49
Course Title : Smart Materials and Systems
Type of Course : PE
Prerequisites : ICPC14
Contact Hours : 42 (3 credits)
Course Assessment Methods : Continuous Assessment, End Assessment
Course Learning Objectives (CLO)
CLO1 To familiarize the students with the different smart materials and their
characteristics.
CLO2 To expose the students to understand the functionalities through the mathematical
equations.
CLO3 To teach the students about the significant features of smart materials in
sensing, actuation and control.
CLO4 To teach the students to design and develop smart structures using smart
material-based actuators and sensors.
Course Content
Introduction to Smart Materials and Structures: smart materials for sensing and actuation, the
role of Smart Materials in developing Intelligent Systems and Adaptive Structures.
Piezoelectric Materials: constitutive relationship, electromechanical coupling coefficients,
piezoelectric constants, piezoceramic materials, variation of coupling coefficients in hard and
soft piezoceramics, polycrystalline vs single crystal piezoelectric materials, polyvinyldene
fluoride, piezoelectric composites.
Actuators and Sensor based on Piezoelectric Materials: Induced Strain actuation model,
Unimorph and Bimorph Actuators, Actuators embedded in composite laminate, Impedance
matching in actuator design, Feedback Control, Pulse Drive, Resonance Drive, Piezoelectric
as a Sensor and its applications.
Magnetostrictive Materials – constitutive relationship, magneto-mechanical coupling
coefficients, Joule Effect, Villari Effect, Matteuci Effect, Wiedemann effect, Giant
magnetostriction in Terfenol-D, Terfenol- D particulate composites, Galfenol and Metglas
materials. Magnetostrictive Mini Actuators, Thermal instabilities, discretely distributed
actuation, Manetostrictive Composites. Magnetostrictive Sensors
Shape Memory Alloys (SMA) – Phase Transformations, Basic Material Behavior and
Modelling Issues, A Comprehensive Model for Uniaxial Stress, Properties of SMAs for
Biomedical Applications Shape Memory Alloy based actuators for Shape Control. Electro-
active Polymers (EAP): Electro-active Polymers for Work-Volume Generation, EAP as
actuator and sensor. Electro-Rheological (ER) fluids, Magneto- Rheological (MR) fluids.
Integration of Smart Sensors and Actuators to Smart Structures – Optimal Placement of
Sensors and Actuators, Design of Controller for Smart Structure, Techniques of Self-Sensing
using piezoelectric and SMA, SMA based encoders, micro robotics, micro devices. Case
Studies to Advanced Smart Materials: Active Fiber Composites (AFC), Energy Harvesting
Actuators and Energy Scavenging Sensors, Self- healing Smart Materials
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 167 | P age
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli
References
1. Mukesh V Gandhi, Brian S Thompson, Smart Materials and Structures, Chapman
and Hall Publishers, 1st Edition, 1992.
2. Mel Schwartz, Encyclopaedia of smart materials, John Wiley and Sons, 1st
Edition,2002.
3. Srinivasan A.V., Michael McFarland D., Smart Structures Analysis and Design,
Cambridge University Press, 1st Edition, 2010.
4. Culshaw B., Smart structures and Materials, Artech house, 1st Edition, 2004.
5. Leo, D.J. Engineering Analysis of Smart Material Systems, John Wiley and sons, 1st
Edition 2008.
6. R.C. Smith, smart material systems: model development, frontiers in applied
mathematics, SIAM, 2005.
7. H. Janocha, Adaptronics and smart structures: Basics, Materials, Design, and
Applications, springer, 2nd Edition, 2007.
8. www.iop.org/sms
9. http:jim.sagepub.com.
Course Outcomes (CO)
On completion of this course, the students will be able to,
CO1 Acquire knowledge about the smart materials, their characteristics and design
aspects.
CO2 Design, model and control smart materials-based structures/systems, through
simulation and experimentation.
CO3 Choose appropriate smart materials for sensing and actuation.
CO4 Analyze and design techniques, to offer solutions to industrial problems using smart
materials.
Course Outcome and Programme Outcome Mapping
0 1 2 1 2 3
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 1 1 O O O
O O O O O O O O O O O O S S S
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
CO1 3 3 3 3 3 - - - 2 2 2 3 3 3 -
CO2 3 3 3 3 3 - - - 2 2 2 3 3 3 -
CO3 3 3 3 3 3 - - - 2 2 2 3 3 3 -
CO4 2 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 3 3 3 2 2 2 1
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 168 | P age
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli