CE203 Mechanics of Fluids - I 2 1 0 3
CE203 MECHANICS OF FLUIDS – I
Course objectives:
To understand the properties of fluids and fluid statics
To derive the equation of conservation of mass and its application
To solve kinematic problems such as finding particle paths and stream lines
To use important concepts of continuity equation, Bernoulli’s equation and turbulence, and
apply the same to problems
To analyze laminar and turbulent flows
Course Content
Continuum concept - CGS, MKS and SI systems - Properties of Fluids - Ideal and real fluid - Pressure
at a point – pressure variation - pressure measurement
5
Department of Civil Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli – 620 015.
Hydrostatic forces on plane and curved surfaces - Buoyancy and equilibrium - Metacentric height and
its determination-Types of flow - continuity equation for one, two and three dimensional flows - stream
function and velocity potential - flow net and its properties
Convective and local acceleration - Pressure, Kinetic and Datum energy - Bernoulli's theorem and
proof - Euler's equations of motion for a three dimensional flow and along a streamline - Deduction
of Bernoulli's theorem - Momentum equation - applications.
Reynold's experiment - Laminar and turbulent flow - Reynold's number - critical flow - Navier-
Stoke equations of motion - shear stress and pressure gradient - Laminar flow between parallel
plates - Couette flow - Hagen Poiseuille equation for flow through circular pipes.
Turbulence - semi empirical theories –Major losses - Darcy-Weisbach equation for flow through circular
pipe - Friction factor - Smooth and rough pipes - Moody diagram - flow through noncircular pipe -
Minor losses - pipes in series and parallel - Equivalent length - Introduction to water hammer
phenomena.
References
1. Nagaratnam, S., Fluid Mechanics, Khanna Publishers, 1995.
2. Natarajan, M.K. Principles of Fluid Mechanics, Oxford & IBH Publishing Co, 1994.
3. Jagdish Lal, Hydraulics and Fluid Mechanics, Tata McGraw Hill, 2001.
4. Streeter V.L., Fluid mechanics, Tata McGraw Hill, 1998.
Course outcomes:
On completion of the course, the students will be able to:
determine the properties of fluid and pressure and their measurement
compute forces on immersed plane and curved plates
apply continuity equation and energy equation in solving problems on flow through conduits
compute the frictional loss in laminar and turbulent flows
analyse flow between reservoirs