Course Code : ICPE57
Course Title : Condition Monitoring
Type of Course : PE
Prerequisites : ICPC14, ICPC17
Contact Hours : 42 (3 credits)
Course Assessment : Continuous Assessment, End Assessment
Methods
Course Learning Objectives (CLO)
CLO1 To introduce the importance of condition monitoring in the automotive, structural
and process industries
CLO2 To make understand the role of different sensors and signal conditioning
techniques in the condition monitoring
CLO3 To expose to wireless sensor networks and their protocols
CLO4 To provide knowledge of machine learning and its relation with condition monitoring
To provide real time exposure in continuous condition monitoring
Course Content
Introduction: Motivation for condition monitoring, Historical overview – Reactive Maintenance,
Scheduled Maintenance, Condition Based Preventive Maintenance, Predictive Maintenance
and Digital Twin. Structural Health Monitoring (SHM) – Advantages and Challenges.
Machinery Fault Diagnosis - Principles, Fault diagnostics and Prognostics. Environmental
Monitoring – Air, Water, Soil contamination. Local and Global health monitoring.
Sensors and Signal Conditioning Techniques: Vibration Monitoring – Accelerometers, Types.
Temperature Monitoring – Thermocouple, RTD (Resistance Temperature Detector), Infrared
Thermography. Fiber Optic Sensors, NDT (Non-Destructive Testing) – Eddy Current Testing,
Magnetic Particle Inspection (MPI), Dye Penetration, Acoustic Emission and its applications.
Smart Sensing for condition monitoring. Data Acquisition Systems, Application of various
signal processing methods – Time domain analysis, Frequency domain analysis, Non-
stationary signal analysis.
Role of Wireless Sensor Networks in Condition Monitoring: Introduction to WSN – Network
Topologies, Advantages and Challenges. IEEE 802.11 Standard. Wireless Network
Protocols – Bluetooth, WiFi, Zigbee, 5G, NFC, RFID. RFID Technology - General Block
diagram, Applications in Condition Monitoring. Introduction to Energy Harvesting Techniques.
Comparison of Wired and Wireless Condition Monitoring.
Machine Learning (ML) for Condition Monitoring :Introduction, Review of Linear Algebra,
Logistic Regression, Regularization, Neural Networks – Representation and Learning,
Machine Learning System Design, Support Vector Machines, Unsupervised Learning,
Dimensionality Reduction, Anomaly Detection. Application to Condition Monitoring.
Applications and Case Studies:Future of Condition based Monitoring – SHM and Rotating
Machinery [2], Railway – Noise and Vibration Monitoring, Crack Detection in Composites
(Aerospace structures), Condition Monitoring in – Agriculture, Biomedical, Food Processing
and Packaging, Pipelines and Piping.
Case study 1 – Machine Fault Diagnosis using Vibration analysis (Wired sensing).
Case study 2 – Crack characterization of metallic structures using RFID Sensor (Wireless
sensing).
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 183 | P age
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli
References
1. Philip Wild, Industrial Sensors and Applications for Condition Monitoring, Professional
Engineering Publishing, April 20, 1994.
2. Fu Ko Chang, Structural Health Monitoring: Current Status and Perspectives, Stanford
University - 1997.
3. Amiya Ranjan Mohanty, Machinery Condition Monitoring Principles and Practices,
CRC press, Taylor and Francis ,2017.
4. Andrew Ng, Machine Learning Yearning, 2018.
Course Outcomes (CO)
On completion of this course, the students will be able to,
CO1 Familiar with the need of condition monitoring in the automotive, structural and
process industries and gain knowledge of sensors and signal conditioning
techniques
CO2 Understand the operation of wireless sensor networks and their deployment.
CO3 Gain the knowledge of machine learning and its application in condition monitoring.
CO4 Develop/Design an application specific condition monitoring system for fault
diagnosis and Prognosis.
Course Outcome and Programme Outcome Mapping
0 1 2 1 2 3
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 1 1 O O O
O O O O O O O O O O O O S S S
P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P
CO1 2 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 3 3 3 2 2 2 1
CO2 3 3 3 3 3 - - - 2 2 2 3 3 3 -
CO3 3 3 3 3 3 - - - 2 2 2 3 3 3 -
CO4 3 3 3 3 3 - - - 2 2 2 3 3 3 -
B.Tech. / Instrumentation and Control Engineering 184 | P age
Department of Instrumentation and Control Engineering, National Institute of Technology, Tiruchirappalli